
The Education 
of Children 

By Alfred Adler

Translated by 

Ekamre and Friedrich Jensen, M.D. 



London 

George Allen Unwin Limited 
Museum Street 




FIRST PUBLISHED 193O 


CHEAP EDITION 1935 
REPRINTED 1947 AND 1957 

This book is copyright under the Berne Convention. 
Apart from any fair dealing for the purposes of private 
study, research, criticism or review, as permitted under the 
Copyright Act 191 1, no portion may be reproduced by any 
process without written permission. Enquiry should be 
made to the publishers. 

© George Allen and Unwin Ltd., 1930 


I Introduction 3 

II The Unity of Personality 23 

III The Striving for Superiority and Its Educational 

Significance 36 

IV Directing the Superiority Striving 61 

V The Inferiority Complex 77 

VI The Development of the Child: Preventing the 

Inferiority Complex 95 

VII Social Feeling and the Obstacles to Its Develop- 
ment 116 

VIII The Child’s Position in the Family: The Psychol- 

ogy of the Situation and the Remedy 187 

IX The New Situation as a Test of Preparation 149 

X The Child at School 166 

XI Influences from Outside 190 

XII Adolescence and Sex Education 209 

XIII Pedagogical Mistakes 227 

XIV Educating the Parent 289 

Appendix 


II : Five Case Histories with Commentaries 269 




 



CHAPTER ONE 


INTRODUCTION 

From a psychological point of view, the prob- 
lem of education reduces itself, in the case of 
adults, to the problem of self-knowledge and ra- 
tional self-direction. In the case of children educa- 
tion may be approached in the same manner, but 
there is this difference: on account of the immaturity 
of children, the question of guidance — ^never wholly 
absent in the case of adults — stakes on supreme im- 
portance. We could, if we wished, allow children to 
develop of their own accord, and if they had twenty 
thousand years or so to develop and a favorable en- 
vironment, they would eventually approach the 
standards of adult civilization. This method is of 
course out of the question, and the adult must neces- 
sarily take an interest ki guiding the child in his 
development. 

Here the great difficulty is ignorance. It is diffi- 
cult enough for the adult to know himself, to know 
the cause of his emotions, his likes and hates — in 


 
sliortj to understand his own psychology. It is 
doubly difficult to understand children and to guide 
them on the basis of proper knowledge. 

Individual Psychology has specially concerned 
itself with the psychology of children, both on its 
own account and for the light it sheds on adult traits 
and adult behavior. And unlike other psychological 
approaches, it allow^s no gap to exist between theory 
and practice. It fastens on the unity of personality 
and studies its dynamic struggle for development 
and expression. From such a point of view scien- 
tific knowledge is already practical wisdom, for the 
knowledge is a knowledge of mistakes, and whoever 
has this knowledge — ^whether it be the psychologist, 
the parent, the friend or the individual himself — 
immediately sees its practical application in the 
guidance of' the personality concerned. 

On account of the method of approach of In- 
dividual Psychology, its doctrines hang together as 
an organic whole. Because it sees the behavior of in- 
dividuals as motivated and directed by the unity of 
personality, whatever Individual Psychology has to 
say about human behavior reflects the same inter- 
relation that is manifested in the activities of the 
psyche. In this opening chapter the attempt will 
therefore be made to present the viewpoint of In- 


 
dividual Psychology as a whole, with the later chap- 
ters undertaking to treat at fuller length the various 
interrelated problems that are here broached. 

The fundamental fact in human development is 
the dynamic and purposive striving of the psyche. A 
child, from its earliest infancy, is engaged in a con- 
stant struggle to develop, and this struggle is in 
accordance with an unconsciously formed but ever- 
present goal — a vision of greatness, perfection and 
superiority. This struggle, this goal-forming ac- 
tivity, reflects, of course, the peculiarly human 
faculty of thinking and of imagining, and it dom- 
inates all our specific acts throughout life. It dom- 
inates even our thoughts, for we do not think ob- 
jectively but in accordance with the goal and style 
of life we have formed. 

The unity of personality is implicit in each human 
being’s existence. Every individual represents both 
a unity of personality and the individual fashioning 
of that unity. The individual is thus both the picture 
and the artist. He is the aKist of his own personality, 
but as an artist he is neither an infallible worker, 
nor a person with a complete understanding of soul 
and body — he is rather a weak, extremely fallible 
and imperfect human being. 



 

In considering the construction of a personality
the chief defect to be noted is that its unitys its par- 
ticular style and goal, is not built upon objective 
reality, but upon the subjective view the individual 
takes of the facts of life. A conception, a view of a 
fact, is never the fact itself, and it is for this reason 
that human beings, ail of whom live in the same 
world of facts, mould themselves differently. Each 
one organizes himself according to his personal view 
of things, and some views are more sound, and some 
views are less sound. We must always reckon with 
these individual mistakes and failures in the develop- 
ment of a human being. Especially must we reckon 
with the misinterpretations made in early childhood, 
for these dominate the subsequent course of our ex- 
istence. 

A concrete instance of this may he seen in this 
clinical case. A woman, at the age of fifty-two, was 
always disparaging women that were older than 
herself. She related the fact that when she was a 
tiny child, she always felt humiliated and under- 
valued because of an older sister, who received all 
the attention. Looking at this case wth what we 
might call the “vertical” point of view of Individual 
Psychology, we can see the same mechanism, the 
same psychological dynamics both at the beginning 


 
of Iier life and at present — ^that is to say, near the 
elose of her existence. There is always the fear of 
being undervalued and the anger and irritation at 
finding others favored or preferred. Even if we knew 
nothing else of this woman’s life, or of her particular 
unity of personality, we could almost fill in the gaps 
in our knowledge on the basis of the two facts given. 
The psychologist acts here like a novelist, who has 
to construct a human being with a definite line of ac- 
tion, style of life, or pattern of behavior, and has to 
construct him in such a way that the impression of a 
unified personality is not disturbed. A good psy- 
chologist would be able to predict the conduct of this 
woman in certain situations, and to describe clearly 
the traits which accompany this particular “life line” 
in her personality. 

The striving or goal-forming activity, which is 
responsible for the construction of individual per- 
sonalities, presupposes another important psy- 
chological fact. This is the sense or feeling of in- 
feriority. All children have an inlierent feeling of 
inferiority which stimulates the imagination and in- 
cites attempts to dissipate the psychological sense of 
inferiority by bettering the situation. A bettering of 
one’s situation results in a lessening of the feeling of 


 
inferiority. From a psychological point of view it 
may be regarded as a compensation. 

Now tile important thing about the sense of in- 
feriority and the mechanism of psychological com- 
pensation is that it opens up a vast possibility of 
making mistakes. The sense of inferiority may stim- 
ulate objective accomplishment ; it may also result 
in a purely psychological adjustment which widens 
the gulf between the individual and objective reality. 
Or, again, the sense of inferiority may appear so 
tragic that the only way it can be overcome is by the 
development of psychological compensatory traits, 
which in the end may not overcome the situation at 
ail but which are nonetheless psychologically neces- 
sary and inevitable. 

There are, for example, three classes of children 
who manifest very clearly the development of com- 
pensatory traits. They are children who come into 
the world with weak or imperfect organs; children 
who are treated with severity and with no affection ; 
and, finally, children who receive too much pamper- 
ing. 

We may take these three classes of children as ex- 
emplifying three basic situations in terms of which 
the development of the more normal types of chil- 
dren may be studied and understood. Not every 


 
child is born a cripple, but it is surprising how many 
children manifest, to a greater or lesser degree, 
psychological traits based on some physical difficulty 
or weak organ — psychological traits of which the 
archetype may be studied in the extreme case of the 
crippled child. And as for the classifications of pam- 
pered and hated children, practically all children fall 
to a greater or lesser degree psychological traits 
based on some physical difficulty or weak organ — 
psychological traits of which the archetype may be 
studied in the extreme case of the crippled child. 
And as for the classifications of pampered and hated 
children, practically all children fall to a greater or 
lesser degree into one, or even both groupings. 

All these three primary situations produce a feel- 
ing of insufficiency and inferiority, and by way of 
reaction, an ambition beyond the realm of human 
possibility. The sense of inferiority and the striving 
for superiority are always two phases of the same 
fundamental fact in human life, and are thus in- 
separable. In pathological situations, it is difficult to 
say whether it is the exaggerated feeling of inferior- 
ity, or the exacerbated striving for superiority which 
is most harmful. They both go together in more or 
less rhythmical waves. In the case of children we 
find the inordinate ambition, aroused by an exag- 


 
gerated sense of inferiority, acting like a poison in 
the soul — forever making the child dissatisfied. Such 
a dissatisfaction is not one which leads to useful ac- 
tivity. It remains fruitless because it is fed by a dis- 
proportionate ambition. This ambition may be seen 
twisting itself into character traits and personal 
mannerisms. It acts like a perpetual irritant mak- 
ing the individual supersensitive and on guard lest 
he be hurt or trodden upon. 

Types of this nature — and the annals of In- 
dividual Psychology are full of them — develop into 
persons whose abilities remain dormant, persons who 
become, as we say, “nervous,” or eccentric. Persons 
of these types, when driven too far, wind up in the 
world of the irresponsible and the criminal because 
they think only of themselves and not of others. 
Their egotism, both moral and psychological, be- 
comes absolute. We find some of them avoiding 
reality and objective facts and constructing a new 
world for themselves. By day-dreaming, by bugging 
imaginative fantasies as if they represented reality, 
they finally succeed in creating psychological peace. 
They ha^T reconciled reality and the mind by con- 
structing reality in the image of the mind. 

In all such developments tlie tell-tale criterion 
which needs to be watched by the psychologist and 


 
by the parent is the degree of social feeling which 
the child or individual manifests. Social feeling is the 
crucial and deciding factor in normal development. 
Every disturbance which results in a lessening of the 
social or communal feeling has a tremendously harm- 
ful effect on the mental growth of the child. Social 
feeling is the barometer of the child’s normality. 

It is around the principle of social feeling that 
Individual Psychology has developed its pedagogi- 
cal technique. Parents or guardians must not per- 
mit a child to attach himself to one person only. If 
this is permitted the child wdll find himself badly or 
insufficiently prepared for later life. 

A good way of finding out the degree of social 
feeling of a child is to observe him at the time when 
he enters school. On entering school the child meets 
with one of liis earliest and severest tests. The school 
is a new situation for the child: it will therefore re- 
veal how Well the child has been prepared to face 
new situations, and particularly how w^ell he has 
been prepared to meet new persons. 

It is the general lack of knowledge as to how to 
prepare a child for school that explains why so many 
adults look back on their school years as a sort of 
nightmare. Of course the school, when properly ad- 
ministered, will often make up for the deficiencies 


 
in the earlier rearing of the children. The ideal school 
should serve as a mediator between the home and 
the wide world of reality, and should be a place not 
merely for book knowledge, but a place in which 
the knowledge and art of living should be taught. 
But while we are waiting for the ideal school to de- 
velop so that it may overcome the deficiencies in 
the parental education of children, we can also put 
our finger on the faults of the parents. 

For analyzing the faults of family upbringing the 
school may serve as an indicator, precisely because 
it is not yet an ideal environment. Children who have 
not been taught how to make contact with others feel 
themselves alone when they enter school. As a result 
they are regarded as peculiar, and thus the initial 
tendency grows stronger and stronger with time. 
Their proper development is thwarted, and they be- 
come behavior problem children. People blame the 
school in such cases, although the school has here 
merely brought out the latent defects in the home 
education. 

It has always been an open question to Individual 
Psychology whether behavior problem children can 
make any progress in school at all. We have always 
been able to prove that it is a danger sign when a 
child begins to fail at school. It is a sign not so much 



THE EDUCATION OP CHILDREN 
of failure in studies but of psycbological failure. It 
means that the child has begun to lose faith in him- 
self. Discouragement has made its appearance, and 
the cliild begins to avoid useful roads and normal 
tasks, searching all the time for another outlet, a road 
to freedom and easy success. Instead of the road 
which society has mapped out, he chooses a private 
road where he can erect a compensation for his in- 
feriority by attaining a sense of superiority. He 
chooses the path that is always attractive to dis- 
couraged individuals — the path of quickest psy- 
chological success. It is easier to distinguish one’s 
self and to give one’s self the feeling of a conqueror 
by throwing off social and moral responsibilities and 
by breaking the law, than by following the estab- 
lished social paths. But this easy road to superiority 
is always an indication of underlying cowardice and 
weakness, no matter what apparent daring and brav- 
ery are manifested in the outward acts. Such a per- 
son always tries to do those things in which he is 
certain to succeed, thus showing off his superiority. 

Just as we observe that criminals, despite their ap- 
parent recklessness and bravery, are at bottom cow- 
ardly, so we have been able to see how children in less 
dangerous situations betray their sense of weakness 
by various small signs. Thus we commonly see chil- 
is 


 


dren (and for that matter adults, too) who are not 
able to stand upright but must always lean against 
something. Under the old methods of training chil- 
dren and the old ways of understanding such signs, 
the symptom was treated but not the underlying 
situation. One used to say to such a child, “Don’t 
lean on something all the time.” Actually what mat™ 
ters here is not that the child leans, hut that he al- 
ways feels the need of a support. One can readily 
persuade the child, either by punishment or reward, 
to give up this sign of weakness, hut his great need 
for support is not thereby relieved. The disease con- 
tinues. It is a good educator who can read signs and 
can eradicate the underlying disease with sympathy 
and understanding. 

From a single sign one can often draw conclu- 
sions as to the presence of many qualities or traits. 
In the case of a child obsessed with the need of lean- 
ing on something, we can see at once that such traits 
as anxiety and dependence are sure to be present. By 
comparing him with similar persons whose cases we 
know thoroughly, we can reconstruct such a person- 
ality, and we can see, in short, that we have to deal 
with a pampered child. 

We turn now to the character traits of another 
class of children — ^those who have gone without love. 

U 


THE EDUCATION OE CHILDREN 
Tlie traits of this class, in their most developed form, 
can be observed by stndying the biographies of all 
the great enemies of humanity. In all the life stories 
of these men the one thing that stands out is the fact 
that as children tliej?' were badly treated. In this way 
they developed a hardness of character, envy and 
hatred. They could not bear to see others happy. 
Now, envious persons of this type are found not 
merely among straight villains but among sup- 
posedly normal persons. Such individuals when they 
have charge of children think that the children 
should not be any happier than they themselves 
were as children. We find such a view applied by 
parents to their children, as well as by guardians 
to the children of others who are put in their 
charge. 

Such a view, such thoughts, do not spring from 
had intentions. They simply reflect the mentality of 
those who have been harshly brought up. Such per- 
sons can produce any number of good reasons and 
maxims, as for example, “Spare the rod and spoil 
the child!” And they give us endless proofs and ex- 
amples, which do not quite convince us inasmuch as 
the futility of a rigid, authoritative education is 
proved by the simple fact that it estranges the child 
from his educator. 




 

By exploring various symptoms and interrelating 
them^ the psychologist can, after some practice, or- 
ganize a system by the aid of which the hidden psy- 
chological processes of an individual may be re- 
vealed, While every point which we examine by this 
system reflects something of the complete personal- 
ity of the individual under investigation, we can 
feel satisfied only when we get the same indications 
at every point of our examination. Individual Psy- 
chology is thus an art as well as a science, and it can- 
not be too much emphasized that the speculative 
scheme, the system of concepts, is not to be applied 
in a wooden and mechanical fashion to an individual 
under examination. In all investigations the pri- 
mary thing is to study the individual; we must never 
draw far-reaching conclusions from one or two 
modes of expression, but we must look for all pos- 
sible supporting phases. Only when we are success- 
ful in confirming our tentative hypothesis, only 
when we have been able, for example, to find the 
same stubbornness and discouragement in other as- 
pects of his behavior, can we say with certainty that 
this stubbornness or discouragement permeates the 
entire personality. 

In this connection it must be remembered that the 
subject under examination has no understanding of 


 
kis own forms of expression and is thus unable to 
conceal Ms true self. We see his personality in action, 
and his personality is revealed not by what he says or 
thinks about himself hut by his acts interpreted in 
their context. It is not that the patient deliberately 
wants to lie to us, but we have learned to recognize 
a vast gulf between a man’s conscious thoughts and 
his unconscious motivations — a gulf which can best 
be bridged by a disinterested but sympathetic out- 
sider, The outsider — ^whether he be the psychologist, 
or the parent or the teacher — should learn to inter- 
pret a personality on the basis of objective facts seen 
as the expression of the purposive, but more or less 
unconscious, strivings of the individual. 

Thus the attitude of the individual with regard 
to the three fundamental questions of individual and 
social life reveals his true self as nothing else can. 
The first of these questions is the social relation, 
which we have already discussed in the context of 
the contrast between the private and objective views 
of reality. But the soci&l relation manifests itself 
also as a specific task — ^it is the task of making 
friends and getting along with people. How does the 
individual meet that problem? What is his answer? 
When a human being believes he can evade the ques- 


 
lion by saying that the matter of friends, the matter 
of social relationships is of complete indiifereiice to 
him, then indifference is his answer. From this in- 
difference we can, of course, draw conclusions as to 
the direction and organisation, of his personality. It 
is to be noted, moreover, that the social relation is 
not confined merely to the physical making of 
friends and meeting of people: all the abstract 
qualities like friendship, comradeship, truthfulness 
and loyalty cluster about this relation, and the an- 
swer to the social relation indicates the Individ oaFs 
answer on all these points. 

The second great question concerns how the in- 
dividual wants to make use of his life — what part he 
wants to take in the general division of labor. If the 
social question may he said to be determined by the 
existence of more than one ego, by the relationship 
I-you, then we may say that this question is deter- 
mined by the fundamental relationship Man-Earth. 
If one could reduce all mankind into one person, this 
person would have mutuality with the earth. What 
does he want from the earth? Just as in the case of 
the first question, the solution of the problem of oc- 
cupation is not a one-sided or private matter, but a 
matter between man and earth. It is a two-sided re- 
lationship in which man hasn’t got it all his own way. 



 
Success is determined not by our private will but in 
relation to objective realities. For this reason the 
answer that an individual makes, and the manner in 
which lie makes it, to the question of occupation 
throws a very revealing light on his personality and 
on his attitude towards life. 

The third fundamental question arises from the 
fact that mankind is divided into two sexes. The 
solution of this problem is again not a private, sub- 
jective matter, but must be solved according to the 
inherent objective logic of the relationship. What is 
my position towards the other sex? The typical pri- 
vate conception is again a mistaken conception. A 
correct solution can be arrived at only through a care- 
ful consideration of all the questions which cluster 
around the sex relationship. And it stands to reason 
that every departure from a correct solution of the 
problem of love and marriage indicates a mistake, 
an error in the personality. Also many of the harm- 
ful consequences that follow a wrong solution of this 
problem are to be interpreted in the light of the un- 
derlying error of personality. 

We can see, therefore, that we are in a position to 
discover the general style of life and particular goal 
of an individual from the way in which he answers 


THE EDUCATION OE CHILDREN 
these tliree questions. The goal is omnipotent. It 
decides a person’s style of life and it will be reflected 
in every one of his acts. Thus if the goal is a striving 
towards being a fellow man, a goal directed to the 
useful side of life, the stamp of that goal will be ap- 
parent in the individual’s solutions of all his prob- 
lems. All the solutions will reflect constructive use- 
fulness, and the individual will have the sense of 
happiness and the feeling of worth and power that 
go with constructive and useful activity. If the goal 
is directed otherwise, if it is directed to the private 
and useless side of life, the individual will find him" 
self unable to solve fundamental problems, and he 
will also lack the joy that comes from their proper 
solution. 

There is a strong interconnection between all 
these fundamental problems, and it is made all the 
stronger by the fact that in the course of social life 
specific tasks spring out of these fundamental prob- 
lems which can be carried out properly only in a 
social or communal setting, or, in other words, on 
the basis of social feeling. These tasks begin in the 
earliest years of childhood, when our sense-organs 
are developing in accordance with the stimulus of 
social life, in looking, speaking, hearing — in our re- 
lations to our brothers, sisters, parents, relatives, 


 
acquaintances, comrades, friends and teachers. They 
continue through life in the same manner, so that he 
who gets out of social touch with his fellows is lost. 

And so Individual Psychology stands on firm 
ground when it regards as “right” that which is use- 
ful for the community. It realizes that every de- 
parture from the social standard is an offense against 
right and brings with it a conflict with the objective 
laws and objective necessities of reality. This clash 
with objectivity makes itself felt first of all in the 
feeling of worthlessness on the part of the offending 
individual, and it also comes out — ^with even stronger 
force — in the retaliations of the others who feel 
themselves aggrieved. Finally, it may be said, that 
the departure from the social standard violates an 
immanent social ideal which every one of us, con- 
sciously or unconsciously, carries in himself. 

With its rigorous emphasis on social-mindedness 
as a test of development. Individual Psychology 
finds it easy to understand and evaluate the style of 
life of any child. F or as soon as the child is confronted 
with a life problem, he will reveal, as if he were under 
examination, whether or not he has been “rightly” 
prepared. He will show, in other words, whether he 
has social feeling, whether he has courage, under- 


 
standing, and in general a useful goal. What we tliei 
try to find out is the form and rliytlim of his upwarc 
striving, the degree of his feeling of inferiority, the 
intensity of his social consciousness. All these tliingj 
are closely interconnected and interpenetrate one 
another so as to form an organic and imbreakabh 
unity — a unity that is unbreakable until the fault oj 
construction is discovered and a reconstruction is ac' 
complished. 


CHAPTER TWO 


THE UNITY OF PERSONALITY 

T he psyeliic life of a child is a wonderful thing, 
and it fascinates at every point where one 
touches it. Perhaps the most remarkable fact of all 
is the in which one must unroll the whole scroll 
of the child’s life in order to understand a single 
event. Every act seems to express the whole of a 
child’s life and personality, and is thus unintelli- 
gible without a knowledge of this invisible back- 
ground. To this phenomenon we give the name unity 
of personality. 

The development of this unity — ^the co-ordination 
of actions and expressions into a single pattern — 
begins at a very early age. The demands of life com- 
pel the child to make his responses in a unified man- 
ner, and this unified manner of answering situations 
is not only what constitutes the child’s character but 
individualizes each of his acts and makes them dis- 
tinct from the similar acts of other children. 

This fact of the unity of personality is generally 


,  
overlooked by most schools of psychology; or, if it 
is not entirely overlooked, it does not receive in their 
hands the attention that it deserves. As a result we 
often find both in psychological theory and in psy- 
chiatrical technique a particular gesture or a par- 
ticular expression singled out for consideration as if 
it were an independent entity. Sometimes such a 
manifestation is called a complex, and the assump- 
tion is that it is possible to separate it from the rest 
of an individual’s activity. But such a procedure is 
comparable to singling out one note from an entire 
melody and attempting to understand the signif- 
icance of this one note apart from the string of notes 
which make up the melody. The procedure is an ini“ 
proper one, but unfortunately it is widespread. 

Individual Psychology is compelled to take a 
stand against this widespread error, which is espe- 
cially harmful when it is applied to the education of 
children. In that connection it expresses itself in the 
theory of punishment. What happens generally 
when a child does something that invites pun- 
ishment? It is true that in a certain sense the total 
impression made by the child’s personality is usually 
taken into account, but this is more often a disad- 
vantage than otherwise, since in the case of an oft- 
repeated mistake the teacher or parent is apt to be 


THE EDUCATION OE CHILDREN 
prejudiced in approaching the child and regards him 
as incorrigible. It is also true that on the basis of a 
total impression one is apt to deal less harshly with 
the mistakes of a child whose behavior is otherwise 
quite good. Nonetheless in neither instance do we 
reach the real root of the problem as we should on the 
basis of the total comprehension of the child’s unity 
of personality. We are in the position of trying to 
understand the significance of a few individual notes 
torn from the context of the whole melody. 

When we ask a child why he is lazy, we cannot 
expect him to know the basic connection which it is 
essential for us to know. Neither can we expect him 
to tell us why he lies. For thousands of years the say- 
ing of Socrates, who had so great an understanding 
of human nature, has been sounding in our ears: 
“How difficult it is to know one’s self!” By what 
right, then, can we demand that a child answer such 
complex questions, the solution of which is difficult 
even for a psychologist? To be able to understand 
the significance of individual expression presup- 
poses having a method for understanding the whole 
personality. This does not mean a description of 
what he does and how he acts, but involves under- 
standing the child’s attitude towards the tasks which 
lie before him. 




 

The following example shows how essential it is 
that we understand the whole context of a child’s 
life. A boy of thirteen was the older of two children. 
He was for five years the only child of parents who 
had seen better days. Then a sister was born. Pre- 
viously every person in his environment was only too 
glad to fulfill every desire the boy had. The mother 
undoubtedly pampered him. The father was a good- 
natured, tranquil sort of person, who enjoyed his 
son’s dependence on him. The son, naturally, was 
closer to his mother, since the father 'was an army 
officer and frequently away from home. N'ow the 
mother was a clever and well-meaning woman, who 
tried to satisfy every whim of her dependent but in- 
sistent son. Nonetheless she was often annoyed at a 
display of ill-breeding or threatening gestures. A 
state of tension was created, and this tension ex- 
pressed itself chiefly in the boy’s constantly trying 
to tyrannize his mother — ordering her about, teas- 
ing her, and in short making himself disagreeably 
prominent wherever and whenever he could. 

The boy’s conduct was very troublesome to his 
mother, hut since there w^ere no other particularly 
bad features, she yielded to him, kept his clothes in 
order and helped him with his school work. The boy 
was always confident that his mother would help him 


 
out of any difficulty he got into. He was undoubt- 
edly an inteUigent child, just as well educated as 
the average, and he went through elementary school 
with fair success until his eighth year. At that time 
a great transformation took place which made the 
relation of the child to his parents unendurable. INot 
only did he drive liis mother wild by his complete 
neglect of himself and by personal carelessness in 
connection with all bodily functions, but he would 
pull his mother’s hair whenever she did not give him 
what he wanted ; he never left her in peace, always 
pinching her ear or pulling her hand. He refused to 
abandon his tactics, and as his baby sister grew up, 
he clung all the more to the behavior pattern he had 
devised. His little sister soon became the target of 
his tricks. Not that he went so far as to harm the 
child physically, but his jealousy of her was clearly 
apparent. His great deterioration dates from the 
time his sister was born and began to play a role in 
the family constellation. 

It needs to be particularly emphasized that in such 
a situation, when a child’s behavior grows worse, or 
certain new unpleasant symptoms make their ap- 
pearance, we must take into consideration not only 
the time when the condition started hut also the 
stimulating cause. The word cause must be used re- 


 
liictantlys since one cannot see wliy the birth of a 
sister sliouM be a reason for an older brother’s be- 
comirig a problem child. Nonetheless this happens 
frequently, and this relationship cannot be regarded 
other than as a mistaken attitude on the part of the 
child. It is not a matter of causality in the strict 
physical-scientific sense, for it cannot be claimed 
that because a younger child is born the older one 
must deteriorate. It may be asserted that when a 
stone falls to the ground, it must fall in a certain 
direction and with a certain speed. But the investiga- 
tions made by Individual Psychology give it the 
right to claim that in a psychic “fall” strict causality 
does not play a role — only bigger or smaller mis- 
takes which, after they are made, affect the future 
development of the individual. 

It is no cause for wonder that in the development 
of the human psyche mistakes should appear, and 
that these mistakes and their consequences should 
Ke side by side and reveal themselves in some failure 
or wrong orientation. All this is due to the goal- 
setting activity of the psyche, and this goal-setting 
involves judgment — ^that is to say, the possibility 
of maldng mistakes. This setting or determining of 
a goal commences in the earliest years. In his second 
or tliird year, as a rule, the child begins to fix for 


 
himself a goal of superiority which is forever before 
him and towards which he strives in his own man- 
nero Now the fixing of the goal usually involves in- 
correct judgment ; nonetheless it is more or less bind- 
ing on the child. The child concretizes his goal, in 
his specific acts and arranges his entire life, so that 
it becomes a constant striving towards this goal. 

We see, then, how important it is to bear in mind 
that a child’s development is determined by his per- 
sonal, individual interpretation of things; how im- 
portant to realize that the child always behaves in 
the circle of his personal mistakes whenever he ap- 
proaches a new and difficult situation. We know 
that the depth or character of the impression which 
the situation makes upon the child does not depend 
upon the objective fact or circumstance (as for ex- 
ample the birth of a second child), but depends 
rather on how this child regards the fact. This is suf- 
ficient ground for refuting the theory of causality; 
necessary connection exists between objective facts 
and their absolute meaning, but not between mis- 
taken views of facts. 

What is truly remarkable about our psychic life 
is that it is our points of view which decide the di- 
rections we take, and not the facts themselves. This 
is an extraordinarily important circumstance, inas- 


 
much as all our actmties are regulated and our per- 
soiiality is organized on the basis of it. A classic ex“ 
ample of this play of subjective ideas in human ac- 
tion is fui-nished by Cesar’s landing in Egypt. As 
he jumped ashore he stumbled and fell on the 
gi’oiind, and the Roman soldiers took this as an un- 
favorable omen. Brave as they were, they would 
nonetheless have turned around and gone hack, had 
not Csesar thrown out his arms and cried out, “I 
have you, Africa!’* We can see from this how little 
the structure of reality is causal, and how its effects 
can be moulded and determined by an organized and 
well-integrated personality. The same thing holds 
true with regard to mob psychology and its rela- 
tions to reason: if a condition of mob psychology 
gives way to common sense, it is not because either 
the mob psychology or common sense reason were 
causally determined by the situation, but because 
both represent spontaneous points of view. Usually 
common sense does not make its appearance until 
after mistaken points of view have been tried out. 

Coming back to the story of the boy, we may say 
that he soon found himself in a difficult situation. 
No one liked him any more, he made no progress at 
school and yet he continued to behave in the same 
way. His behavior, which was continually disturbing 


 
to otlierSs had become a complete expression of his 
personality. And so what happened? Whenever he 
disturbed some one, he was immediately punished. 
He would get a bad report card or else a letter of 
complaint would he sent to his parents. Things went 
on in this way until at length his parents were ad- 
vised to remove the boy from school, since he did not 
seem suited for school life. 

Probably nobody was happier than the boy at 
such a solution. He did not want anything else. The 
logical consistency of his behavior pattern revealed 
itself again in his attitude. It was a mistaken atti- 
tude, but once assumed it expressed itself consis- 
tently. He had made his basic mistake when he had 
set for himself the goal of always being the center of 
attention. And if he was to be punished for any 
mistake, this is the mistake for which he should have 
been punished. It was as a result of this mistake that 
he tried constantly to make his mother wait on him. 
And it was as a result of this mistake, too, that he 
acted like a king who, after eight years of absolute 
power, is suddenly deprived of his throne. Up to the 
moment of his dethronement he had been the only 
one who existed for his mother, and she for him. 
Then his sister arrived, and he struggled violently 
to recover his lost throne. That was again his mis- 


 
take, but one must grant that such a blunder does 
not involve any inherent badness or vicioiiseess. Vi- 
ciousness first develops when a child is brought into 
a situation for which he is totally unprepared, and is 
allowed to struggle without any guidance. Take a 
child, for example, who has been prepared only for 
a situation in which some one devotes herself entirely 
to him; suddenly the contrary is true. The child is 
at school, where the teacher must divide his attention 
among many, and is rather annoyed when one child 
demands more than his proportionate share. Such 
a situation is full of danger for the pampered child, 
but at the outset the child is far from being vicious 
or incorrigible. 

It is understandable that in the case of the boy a 
conflict should have developed between his personal 
scheme of existence and the scheme of existence de- 
manded by the school. The conflict may be repre- 
sented diagrammatically by picturing the direction 
and the goal of the child’s personality and the goal 
set by school life. The goals point in diverging di- 
rections. But everything that happens in the child’s 
life is determined by his goal, and there is no mo- 
tion, so to speak, in his whole system except in the 
direction of this goal. On the other hand the school 


 
expects a normal scheme of existence for every child« 
The conflict is InevitaMe, but the school fails to ap- 
preciate the psychological facts in the situation and 
neither makes any allowances for it nor attempts to 
obviate the source of the conflict. 

We know that the child’s life is motivated by the 
dominant desire to make his mother serve him and 
him alone. In his psychological scheme of existence 
everjdhing may be said to converge on this thought : 
I must dominate my mother, I must be the only one 
to possess her. But other things are expected of him. 
It is expected of him that he work alone, that he take 
care of his school books and papers, and that he keep 
his possessions in order. It is as if one hitched a fiery 
race horse to a truck wagon. 

Of course the hoy’s performance in such a case is 
not of the highest, hut when we know what the real 
circumstances are we are much more inclined to be 
sympathetic. It is no use to punish the boy in school, 
because that would definitely convince him that 
school is no place for him. When he is expelled from 
school, or when the parents are asked to take him 
away, the boy is that much nearer to his goal. His 
false scheme of apperception acts like a trap. He 
feels that he has gained, because he now really has 

rubWt 


mss 


 
Ills iiiotlier in his power. She must again devote her- 
self exclusively to him. And that is just what lie 
wants. 

When we recognize the true state of affairs we 
must admit that it is of no use to pick one fault or 
another and punish the child for it. Suppose for ex- 
ample that he forgets a book — would be a wonder 
if he didn’t, for when he forgets it he gives his mother 
something to do. It is not an isolated individual act, 
it is part of the whole scheme of personality. When 
we bear in mind that all the expressions of a per- 
sonality are consistent parts of a whole, we can see 
that this boy is acting simply in accordance with his 
style of life. And the fact that he acts consistently, 
in accordance with the logic of his personality, at 
the same time disproves any presumption that his in- 
ability to perform his school tasks is due to feeble- 
mindedness. A feeble-minded person is unable to 
follow out his own style of life. 

This highly complex case brings up still another 
point. We are all of us in a somewhat similar situa- 
tion to that of this boy. OiSr own schemes, our own 
interpretations of life are never in complete har- 
mony with the received social tradition. In the old 
days one looked upon the social tradition as sacro- 
sanct ; now we have come to realize, however, that 



 
there is nothing sacred or fixed about the social in- 
stitutions of humanity. They are all in process of 
developmentj and the motive power in that process 
is the struggle of the individuals within society. So- 
cial institutions exist for the sake of the individual 
and not the individual for the sake of social insti- 
tutions. The salvation of the indi\’idual lies indeed 
ill being social-minded, but social-mindedness does 
not imply forcing the individual into a Procrustean 
social mould. 

Such considerations on the relation of the in- 
dividual to society, ’Which lie at the basis of the doc- 
trines of Individual Psychology, apply with special 
force to the school system and its treatment of mal- 
adjusted children. The school must learn to regard 
the child as a personality, as a value to be cultivated 
and developed, and at the same time it must learn 
to use psychological insight in judging particular 
acts. It must regard these particular actSj as we have 
said, not as single notes but in the context of the 
whole melody — the unity of personality. 




CHAPTEH THEEE 


THE STRIVING FOR SUPERIORITY AND ITS 
EDUCATIONAL SIGNIFICANCE 

N ext to the unity of personality the most im- 
portant psychological fact about human na- 
ture is the striving for superiority and success. This 
striving is of course directly related to the feeling of 
inferiority, for if vre did not feel inferior we should 
not have any desire to go beyond the immediate 
situation. The two problems — tlie desire for su- 
perlority and the sense of inferiority — are really 
two phases of the same psychological phenomenon, 
but for purposes of exposition it is convenient to 
treat them more or less separately. In this chapter 
we shall try to confine ourselves to the striving for 
superiority and its educational consequences. 

The first question that one may ask about the striv- 
ing for superiority is whether it is innate, like our 
biological instincts. The answer we must give is that 
this is a highly improbable supposition. We cannot 
really speak of the superiority striving as in any 



 
definite sense inborn. However, we must admit that 
a substrate must exist — ^there must be an embryonic 
core with the possibilities of development. Perhaps 
we may put it best this way; human nature is tied up 
with the development of the striving for superiority. 

We know, of course, that human activities are 
confined within certain bounds, and that there are 
abilities which we can never develop. For example, 
we can never attain the smell faculty of a dog; nor 
is it possible to perceive with our eyes the ultra-violet 
rays of the spectrum. But there are certain func- 
tional abilities which can be developed further, and 
it is in this possibility of fm*ther development that 
we see the biological root of the striving for superior- 
ity and the whole source of the psychological un- 
folding of personality. 

As far as we can see, this dynamic urge to assert 
one’s self under all circumstances is common both to 
children and adults. There is no way of exterminat- 
ing it. Human nature does not tolerate permanent 
submission; humanity has even overthrown its gods. 
The feeling of degradation and depreciation, the 
mood of uncertainty and of inferiority always give 
rise to a desire for reaching a higher level in order 
to obtain compensation and completeness. 

We can show that certain peculiarities of children 


 
betray the work of enTironmental forces wliicli de- 
velop ill them feelings of inferiority, weakness and 
uncertainty, which in turn exercise a stimulating 
influence upon their whole mental life. They make it 
their aim to free themselves from this condition, to 
reach a higher level and to gain a feeling of equality. 
The more stormy the upward aspirations are, the 
higher the child sets his aims, looking for proofs of 
his strength — ^proofs which often transcend the 
limits of human powers. Because of the support that 
he sometimes obtains from various quarters, the 
cliild is enabled to project a picture of the future 
bordering on God. In one way or another the imag“ 
ination of children is apt to betray the fact that they 
are possessed with the idea of divine resemblance. 
This generally occurs in children who feel weakest. 

There is the case of a child of fourteen years who 
found himself in a very bad mental situation. When 
he was asked for childhood impressions, he remem- 
bered how painful it was for him to realize that he 
was unable to whistle at the age of six. One day, 
however, as he came out of his house he succeeded in 
whistling. He was so surprised that he believed that 
it was God who whistled in him. This shows clearly 
that there is an intimate and close connection be- 



 
tween the feeling of weakness on the one hand and 
the nearness of God on the other. 

This aspiration for superiority is connected with 
striking character traits. By observing this tendency 
we witness the whole ambition of such a child. When 
this desire for self-assertion becomes extraordinarily 
intense, it will also always involve an element of 
envy. Children of this type easily develop the habit 
of wishing their competitors all kinds of evils ; and 
not only wishing — which often leads to neurosis — 
but also doing harm, causing trouble, and eyen man- 
ifesting now and then downright criminal traits. 
Such a child can slander, betray domestic secrets and 
degi’ade the other fellow so as to feel that his own 
value is enhanced, especially when he is being ob- 
served by others. No one is supposed to surpass him, 
therefore it does not matter to him whether he him- 
self rises or the other fellow sinks in value. WTien the 
desire for power becomes very strong, it expresses 
itself in malevolence, vindictiveness. These children 
will always display a militant and defiant attitude, 
which will show itself in their external appearance 
—in the flashing of their eyes, in their sudden out- 
bursts of anger, in their readiness to fight imaginary 
foes. To be submitted to a test is, for children aim- 


 
ing at superiority, an extremely painful situation, 
for in this way their worthlessness might easily be 
exposed. 

This fact shows that it is necessary to adapt the 
tests to the peculiarities of the child. A test does not 
mean the same thing to every child. We can often 
find children for whom a test is a highly burdensome 
event, who blush and turn pale, begin to stutter and 
tremble, who are so paralyzed by shame and fear 
that their minds become blank. Some can answer 
only in unison with others, otherwise they cannot an- 
swer at ail because they suspect that they are being 
watched. This desire for superiority will also mani- 
fest itself in plays. An intense desire for superiority 
in this direction will not allow the child to play the 
part of a horse at the time when others appear as 
drivers. He will always want to be the driver him- 
self, he will always attempt to lead and direct. But 
when he is kept back by past experience from assum- 
ing such a role, he will content himself with disturb- 
ing the games of others. And if he is still further dis- 
couraged by numerous defeats, his ambition will be 
thwarted, and any new situation will drive him back 
instead of stimulating him to go forward. 

Ambitious children who have not yet been dis- 
couraged will display inclinations for competitive 


 
games of all kinds, and they will equally manifest 
consternation in case of defeat. The degree and di- 
rection of the desire for self-assertion can often be 
inferred from favorite games, tales, historical fig- 
ures, persons. In the case of adults we often find 
the worship of Napoleon, who is highly fit to serve 
as a model for ambitious people. Megalomania in 
day-dreaming is always a sign of a strong feeling of 
inferiority which stimulates disappointed people to 
look for satisfaction and intoxication in feelings pro- 
duced outside of reality. Something similar often 
takes place in dreams. 

In observing the different directions which chil- 
dren take in their striving for superiority, variations 
become apparent which we can divide into certain 
types. We cannot make this type division a precise 
one because the variations are innumerable, and are 
determined primarily by the amount of confidence 
the child has in himself. Children whose development 
has not been hindered direct this striving for su- 
periority into the channels of useful accomplish- 
ment ; they try to please their teachers, to be orderly, 
to develop into normal school youngsters. We know 
from our experience, however, that these cases are 
not in the majority. 

There are also children who want to excel others 


 
and who manifest a suspicious intensity in their 
struggle to surpass. Frequently there is a note of 
exaggerated ambition in such a striving which is 
easily overlooked because we are accustomed to re- 
gard ambition as a virtue and to stimulate the child 
to further effort. This is usually a mistake because 
the development of a child suffers from too much 
ambition. A swollen ambition produces a state of 
tension which the child can bear for a while, but 
inevitably there will be signs that the tension is grow- 
ing too great. The child may spend too much time 
at home with his books and his other activities will 
suffer. Such children frequently avoid other prob- 
lems solely on account of their eagerness to be ahead 
in school. We cannot be completely satisfied with 
such a development since a child cannot thrive men- 
tally and physically under such circumstances. 

The way in which such a child arranges his life to 
be able to surpass all others is not best suited to a 
normal growth. There comes a time when he must 
be told not to spend so much time with his books, to 
go out into the air, to play with his friends and oc- 
cupy himself with other things. Such children are 
likewise not in the majority, but they occur fre- 
quently enough. 





 

In additioiij it often happens that there are two 
pupils ill a class between whom there is a tacit 
rivaliy« He who has the opportunity to observe 
closely will find that such competing children occa- 
sionally develop traits which are not particularly 
agreeable. They become envious and jealous, quali- 
ties which certainly do not belong to an independ- 
ent, harmonious personality. They are annoyed at 
the successes of other children, they commence to 
have nervous headaches, stomach aches, etc., when 
some one else forges ahead. They withdraw to one 
side when another child is praised, and of course they 
will never be able to praise somebody else. This is a 
sign of envy which does not throw such a good light 
upon exaggerated ambition. 

Such children do not get along well with their 
comrades. They want the leading part in every- 
thing and are unwilling to subordinate themselves 
to the general organization of a game. The result 
is that they do not like to play in company and act 
haughtily toward their schoolmates. Every contact 
with their schoolmates is to them unpleasant; the 
more so, the more insecure they believe their position 
to be. Such children are never sure of their success 
and are easily rattled when they feel themselves in 


 
an insecure atmosphere. They are overburdened by 
the expectations which others have in regard to tlieiiis 
and also by their own expectations of tliemselves. 

The expectations that the families have of such 
children are felt very keenly by the children them- 
selves. They go about fulfilling every task that is set 
before them with excitement and nervousness be- 
cause they have always before their eyes the vision 
of surpassing all others, of being a “shining light.” 
They feel the weight of the hopes which rest on them, 
and they will carry this weight only so long as cir- 
cumstances are favorable. 

If human beings were blessed with absolute truth 
and were able to find a perfect method which would 
spare children such difficulties, we should probably 
have no behavior problem children. Since we do not 
have such a method, and since the conditions under 
which children must learn cannot be ideally ar- 
ranged, it is obvious that the anxious expectations 
of such children are an extraordinarily dangerous 
matter. They will face a difficulty with quite differ- 
ent feelings from those which other children have 
who are not burdened with such unhealthy ambition. 
By difficulties we mean those which are unavoid- 
able, It is and probably always will be impossible to 
prevent a child from encountering difficulties. This 



 


is partly due to our methods which are in need of 
further development, which do not suit every child, 
and which we are constantly seeking to improve. It 
is also due to the fact that the confidence which chil- 
dren have in themselves is undermined by an exag- 
gerated ambition. Difficulties are not faced with the 
courage necessary to overcome them. 

Over-ambitious children are concerned only with 
the end result which is the recognition accorded their 
success. The success itself does not satisfy without 
the recognition. We know that in many cases it is 
much more important for a child to maintain his 
mental balance when difficulties present themselves 
than actually to attempt to conquer these difficulties 
at once. A child who has been forced into such an 
ambitious direction does not know this, and feels it is 
impossible to live without the admiration of others. 
The result is everywhere observable in the number of 
people dependent upon the opinion of others. 

How important it is not to lose the sense of bal- 
ance in the matter of values is shown by the example 
of those children who come into the world with organ 
inferiorities. Such cases are, of course, quite com- 
mon. Many children are better developed on the left 
than on the right side; this is a fact which is usually 
unknown. A left-handed child has many difficulties 
. 45 


THE EDUCATION OF CHILDHEN 


in our riglit-handed civilization. It is necessary to 
use certain metliods to discover whether a cliiid is 
right or left-handed. Almost without exception we 
find left-handed children among those who have ex- 
ceptional difficulty in writing, reading and drawing, 
and who are generally awkward with their hands. 
One simple, but not entirely conclusive method for 
finding out whether a child is congenitally right- 
or left-handed, is to ask the child to cross his hands. 
Left-handed children usually cross their hands so 
that the left thumb lies over the right. It is astound- 
ing to see how many people are born left-handed and 
have never known it. 

When we investigate the history of a large num- 
ber of left-handed children, we find the following 
facts : first, that such children were usually regarded 
as clumsy or awkward (which is no wonder in our 
right-handed arrangement of things). To under- 
stand the situation, it is only necessary to think how 
perplexing it is, when we have been accustomed to 
right-handed traffic, to attempt to cross the street in 
a town where traffic is to the left (England, for ex- 
ample, or Argentina). A left-handed child finds 
himself in an even worse situation in a family where 
all the others are right-handed. His left-handedness 
disturbs both the family and himself. When he 
m 



 
learns to write in school, he finds himself below the 
average. As the reason is not understood, he is 
scolded, receives bad marks, and is often punished. 
The child cannot interpret his situation otherwise 
than to believe that he is in some way less capable 
than the others. A feeling will grow in him of hav- 
ing been curtailed, of being in some way inferior, 
or of not being able to compete with the others. 
Since he is scolded at home also for his clumsiness, 
he sees there only a confirmation of his inferiority. 

Naturally the child does not have to accept this as 
a final defeat, but there are many children who give 
up the struggle under such disheartening condi- 
tions. Since they do not understand the real situation 
and no one explains to them how to overcome their 
difficulties, it is hard for them to keep on fighting. 
Many people, on this account, have an illegible hand- 
writing because they have never trained their right 
hands sufficiently. That this obstacle can be over- 
come is proven by the fact that one finds left-handed 
persons among the best artists and painters, and also 
among script engravers. These persons have de- 
veloped an ability to use their right hands simply by 
force of training despite their congenital left- 
handedness. 

There is a superstition that all left-handed per- 


 
sons wlio are trained to use their right hand become 
stutterers. This superstition is explained by the fact 
that the difficulties put in the way of such children 
are sometimes so great that they may lose their 
courage to speak. That is also why there is such an 
unusual number of left-handed persons to be found 
among those who manifest other forms of discour- 
agement (neurotics, suicides, criminals, perverse in- 
dividuals, etc.). On the other hand, one often finds 
that those people who have overcome their left- 
handedness have also achieved high rank in life, fre- 
quently in an artistic atmosphere. 

No matter how insignificant the single character- 
istic of left-handedness may appear, it still teaches 
us something of great importance ; namely, that we 
can determine nothing of the ability of a child until 
we have brought his courage and perseverance up to 
a certain point. When we frighten the children, take 
away from them the hope of a better future, it may 
still appear to us that they are capable of carrying 
on. But if we were to increase their courage, such 
children would he capable of accomplishing much 
more. 

Children with inordinate ambition are in a bad 
situation because it is customary to judge them by 
their success and not according to their prepared- 



 
ness to face difficulties and to combat them. It is also 
eustomary in our present form of civilization to be 
mucli more concerned with visible success than with 
thorough education. We know how perishable is that 
success which comes to us with little effort. It can 
therefore be of no advantage to train a child to be 
ambitiouso It is much more important to train him 
to be courageous, persevering and self-confident, to 
recognize that failure should never discourage, but 
should be tackled as a new problem. It would cer» 
tainly be much easier if the teacher were able to 
recognize at what point a child’s efforts seemed fu- 
tile and also whether the child made sufficient effort 
in the first place. 

We see, therefore, that a striving for superiority 
can express itself in a character trait like ambition. 
There are children whose striving for superiority 
originally took the form of ambition, but who re- 
linquished this ambition as unattainable because an- 
other child had already gotten so very much further 
ahead. Many teachers follow the practice of treating 
children who do not manifest sufficient ambition 
very severely, or giving them bad marks in order 
to arouse their dormant ambition. Occasionally this 
method is successful if there is still some courage left 
in the child. However, this method is not to he recoin- 


 
mended for general use. Children already close to 
the danger line in their studies become completely 
confused and are driven into a state of apparent stu- 
pidity by such treatment. 

On the other hand, we are often astounded at the 
unsuspected intelligence and capability which chil- 
dren manifest after having been handled with gen- 
tleness, care and understanding. It is true that chil- 
dren who change in this fashion frequently exhibit 
a greater ambition. This is simply because they are 
afraid of falling back to the old state. Their old way 
of living and the past lack of accomplishment re- 
main before their eyes like warning signals and con- 
tinually urge them forward. In later life many of 
them behave as if possessed by a demon ; they occupy 
themselves day and night, suffer constantly from the 
effects of overwork, and believe that they are never 
doing enough. 

All this becomes much clearer when we keep in 
mind the dominant idea of Individual Psychologj^ 
that every individual’s personality (child as well as 
adult) is a unified whole,*^ and that it always ex- 
presses itself in accordance with the behavior pat- 
tern which he has gradually built up. To judge an 
act detached from the personality of the actor is 
wrong because a specific and single act can be inter- 



 
preted in many ways. The uncertainty in judging 
Yanislies at once when we comprehend the particular 
act or gesture — for example, tardiness — as the in- 
evitable answer of the child to the tasks set him by 
the school. It means simply that he would rather 
have nothing to do with the school, and consequently 
that he does not bother to fulfill the school’s require- 
ments. In fact he does what he can in order not to 
comply with them. 

From this standpoint we can see the whole picture 
of the “bad” school child. We see the tragedy that 
takes place when the striving for superiority ex- 
presses itself not in the acceptance of school hut in 
the rejection of it. A series of typical behavior symp- 
toms appear and gradually these symptoms ap- 
proach closer and closer to incorrigibility and retro- 
gradation. The child may turn into the type like the 
court jester. He constantly plays pranks to make 
others laugh and does little else. Or he may annoy 
his comrades. Or else he plays truant and falls in 
mth evil companions. 

We see, then, how nol; only does the fate of the 
school child lie in our hands, but the later develop- 
ment of the individual as well. The education and 
training furnished by the school determine in a cru- 
cial fashion the future life of the individual. The 
■ 51 . 


 
school is placed in between the family and life in 
society. It has the opportunity of correcting the mis- 
taken styles of life formed nnder family upbringiiig, 
and it has the responsibility of preparing the child’s 
adjustment to social life and of seeing to it that the 
child will play his indmdnai role harmoniously in 
the orchestral pattern of society. 

When we view the role of the school historically 
we see that it has always tried to turn out individuals 
according to the social ideal of the time. It was suc- 
cessively an aristocratic, religious, bourgeois and 
democratic school, always educating the children ac- 
cording to what the times and the rulers demanded. 
To-day in accordance with the changing social ideal 
the school must change also. Thus if to-day the ideal 
adult human being is typified by the independent, 
self-controlled and courageous man or woman, the 
school must regulate itself so that it will turn out in- 
dividuals approaching that ideal. 

In other words the school must not regard itself 
as an end in itself and must keep in mind that the in- 
dividual must be trained fcTr society and not for the 
school. Thus it must not neglect the children who 
have given up the ideal of being model children at 
school. These children do not necessarily have less 



 
of a striving for superiority. They can turn their at- 
tention to other things where they do not have to 
strain themselves^ and where they believes either 
rightly or wrongly, that success is easier to achieve. 
This may he due to the fact that they have uncon- 
sciously trained themselves in their earlier years for 
other activities. Thus they may not become bril- 
liant mathematicians, but they may distinguish 
themselves in athletics. The educator should never 
dismiss any such salient accomplishment but should 
use it as a point of departure to encourage the child 
to improve in other spheres of activity. The educa- 
tor’s task is much easier when he starts with a single 
encouraging accomplishment and uses it to make the 
child believe he can be just as successful in other 
things. It is enticing the child, as it were, from one 
fruitful pasture to another. And since all children, 
except those who are feeble-minded, are quite ca- 
pable of coping successfully with their school work, 
wliat needs to be overcome is simply an artificially 
constructed barrier. This barrier arises from taking 
abstract school performance, instead of the ultimate 
educational and social goal, as the basis for judg- 
ment. On the child’s side the barrier is reflected in a 
lack of self-confidence, with the result that the child’s 


 


striving for superiority may bring out a break with 
useful activity because it does not find its proper ex- 
pression, 

Wliat does the child do in such a situation? He 
thinks of a way of escape. Often we may find him 
assuming some peculiarity which does not actually 
draw praise from the teacher, but which may attract 
the teacher’s attention, or may only arouse the ad- 
miration of the other children at such a display of im- 
pertinence or stubbornness. Such a child, by virtue 
of the disturbance he creates, often regards himself 
as a hero, and as a little giant. 

Such psychological manifestations and deviations 
from proper conduct arise in the course of the school 
experiment. Their origin cannot be traced alto- 
gether to the school, although it is in school that they 
come to the surface. The school, taken in a passive 
sense, that is to say, apart from its active educational 
and corrective mission, is an experiment station 
where the defects of the early family upbringing are 
brought to light. 

A good and watchful teacher can see many things 
the first day a child is in school. For many children 
show at once all the signs of a pampered child to 
whom the new situation (the school) is most painful 
and disagreeable. Such a child has had no practice 



THE EDUCATION OF CHILDKEN' 
in making contacts with others, and it is essential 
that lie be able to make friends. It is better and 
preferable that a child bring with him to school some 
knowledge of how to establish contact with others. 
He must not be dependent upon one person to the 
exclusion of all others. The fault of family upbring- 
ing must be corrected at school, but it is of course 
better that be come to the school more or less free 
from such a fault. 

A child who has been pampered at home cannot 
be expected to be suddenly able to concentrate on his 
work at school. Such a child is not attentive. He will 
manifest a desire to remain at home rather than go 
to school — in fact he will have no “school sense.” 
It is easy to detect the signs of this aversion to school. 
Thus the parents have to coax the child to get up in 
the morning; they must constantly urge him to do 
this or that ; they will find him dawdling over break- 
fast, and so on. It %voiiid seem as if such a child has 
constructed an impassable barrier to prevent bis 
making progress. 

The cure, the remedy for the situation, is the same 
as with left-handed persons : we must give such chil- 
dren time to learn, and we must not punish them 
when they come late to school because that only in- 
creases their sense of unhappiness at school. Such 


 
punishment is regarded by the child as confirmatory 
of his feeling that he does not belong in school When 
parents whip a child in order to force him to go to 
school the child will not only not want to attend 
school but will look for means to make his position 
more bearable. These means will, of course, be means 
of escape, not means of actually meeting the diffi- 
culty, The child’s aversion to school, his inability to 
cope with the school problem will he apparent in 
every gesture and in every movement. He will never 
have his books together and will always be forget- 
ting or losing them. When a child makes a habit of 
forgetting and losing books we may be certain that 
he is not on very good terms with his school. 

In examining such children one finds almost in- 
variably that they had no hope of being able to 
achieve any measure of success at school. This self- 
undervaluation is not entirely their own fault. The 
environment has helped them along in this mistaken 
direction. At home some one in anger has prophesied 
a dark future, or has called them stupid or worth- 
less. When these children find at school what ap- 
pears to be a confirmation of such accusations, they 
jack the judgment, the power of analysis (which 
their eiders often also lack) to correct their misin- 
terpretation. They thus give up the battle before 



 
tliey even make an attempt at combat, and they con- 
sider the defeat which they themselves bring about 
as an insiiraioimtable obstacle and as a confirmation 
of their inability or inferiority. 

Since circumstances are usually such that, once a 
mistake is made, there is little possibility of having 
the mistake corrected, and since these children 
usually lag behind in spite of their apparent efforts 
to forge ahead, the}^ soon give up the effort and turn 
their attention to inventing excuses for staying 
away from school. Absence from school, that is to 
say, truancy, is one of the most dangerous symptoms. 
It is regarded as one of the worst sins, and the pun- 
ishment is usually drastic. Thereupon the children 
believe themselves compelled to take refuge in cun- 
ning and in misrepresentation. There still remain a 
few paths which lead them into further misdeeds. 
They can forge notes from home and falsify report 
cards. They can spin a net of lies at home about all 
they are supposed to be doing at school, which place 
they have not attended for some time. They also have 
to find a place to hide during school hours. It goes 
without saying that they usually find in such hiding 
places other children who have already trodden this 
path. And so the children’s striving for superiority 
remains unsatisfied after merely playing truant — it 


 
urges them to further acts, that is to say, to law- 
breaking. They go further and further, ending up 
with full-fledged criminality. They form gangs, 
they begin to steal, they learn sexual perversions, 
and they feel themselves quite grown up. 

The great step having been taken, they now search 
for more food for their ambition. Inasmuch as they 
have remained undetected in their acts, they feel 
that they can commit the most cunning of crimes. 
This explains why so many children will not give up 
their life of crime. They want to go further in their 
development along that road because they believe 
that they can never achieve success in any other di- 
rection. They have excluded everything which might 
stimulate them to useful activity. Their ambition, 
continually stimulated by the deeds of their com- 
rades, drives them to new a-social or anti-social acts. 
One never finds a child with criminal tendencies who 
is not at the same time extremely conceited. This 
conceit has the same source as ambition, and it forces 
the child continually to distinguish himself in some 
way or other. And when he cannot make a place for 
himself on the useful side of life, he turns to the use- 
less side. 

There is the case of a boy who killed his teacher. 
If we examine the case we find all the characteristic 



 
traits in this boy. It is a boy who had a careful but 
too nervous an upbringing under the guidance of a 
governess wdio believed that she knew everything 
there was to know about the expression and function 
of mental life. The boy lost faith in himself because 
his ambition passed from exaggerated heights to 
nothing — that is to say, to sheer discouragement. 
Life and school did not fulfill his expectations, and 
so he turned to law-breaking. By law-breaking he 
passed out of the control of the educator and the 
child guidance expert, for society has not yet devised 
the apparatus for treating criminals, especially ju- 
venile criminals, as educational problems — prob- 
lems in the correction of psychological mistakes. 

There is a curious fact that is familiar to any one 
who has ever had much to do with pedagogy, and 
that is the frequency with which we find wayward 
children in the families of teachers, ministers, doc- 
tors and lawyers. This applies not merely to educa- 
tors without much professional standing but also 
♦ 

to those whose opinions we regard as important. 
Despite their professional authority they seem to be 
unable to bring about jieace and order in their own 
families. The explanation is that in all such fam- 
ilies certain important viewpoints have either been 
■■■• ' 59 ; " 


 
entirely overlooked or not comprehended. Part of 
the difficulty comes, for instance, from the strict 
rules and regulations which the educator-parent, by 
means of his assumed authority, tries to force on his 
family. He oppresses his children too severely. He 
threatens their independence and often indeed robs 
them of it. It seems as if he arouses in them a mood 
which compels them to take revenge for this op- 
pression, which is rooted in their memory by the rod 
with which they have been beaten. Also it must be 
remembered that deliberate pedagogy leads to an 
extraordinarily sharpened observation. For the most 
part this is of great advantage, but in the case of 
one’s own children it results often in making the 
children want to be constantly in the center of at- 
tention, They regard themselves as a display ex- 
periment, and they , look upon the others as the 
responsible and determining parties. These others 
have to remove all the difficulties and the children 
themselves feel free of any responsibility. 


CHAPTER FOUR 


DIRECTING THE SUPERIORITY STRIVING 

W E have seen that every diild has a striving 
for superiority. What a parent or edu- 
cator has to do is to direct this striving into a fruitful 
and useful channel. He has to see to it that the striv- 
ing is productive of mental health and happiness in- 
stead of neurosis and disorder. 

How is this to be done? "Wliat is the basis of dif- 
ferentiating between useful and useless manifesta- 
tions of the striving for superiority? The answer is, 
interest in the community. It is impossible to think 
of any achievement, anything worth while that any- 
body has ever done, that has no connection with the 
community. If we recall the great deeds which seem 
to us noble, lofty and valuable, we shall see that 
these deeds have been valuable not only to the doer 
but to the community at large. Hence the education 
of a child must be so organized that the child will 
recognize social feeling or a sense of solidarity with 
the community. 


 

Children who do not understand the notion of so- 
cial feeling become problem children. Tliej^ are sim- 
ply children whose striving for superiority has not 
been turned to use. 

It is true that there are wide differences of opin- 
ion as to what is useful to the community. One thing, 
however, is certain: we can judge a tree by its fruits. 
The results of any particular act will show whether 
it has been useful or useless to the community. This 
means that we must take account of time and effects. 
Eventually the act must intersect with the logic of 
reality, and this intersection with the logic of reality 
will show whether the act has any relevance to the 
needs of the community at large. It is the universal 
structure of things which is the standard of value, 
and sooner or later the contradiction or agreement 
with this standard is bound to come out. It is 
fortunate, moreover, that in ordinary life we do not 
find ourselves very often in a situation that requires 
a complicated technique of judgment. As regards 
social movements, political trends, etc., whose effect 
we cannot clearly foresee, there is room for contro- 
versy. However, even here — in the life of peoples 
as well as in individual lives — the effects ultimately 
indicate whether certain acts are useful and true or 
not. For from a scientific point of view we cannot 



 
call anything good or useful for all unless it is an 
absolute truth and a correct solution of the problem 
of life^ and the problem of life is conditioned by the 
earth, the cosmos, and the logic of human inter- 
relationship. These conditions of the objective and 
human universe confront us like a mathematical 
problem which carries its solution within itself, 
even though we are not always in a position to solve 
such a problem. We can only decide upon the cor- 
rectness of the solution when we test it in the light 
of the data of the problem. It is a pity that some- 
times the opportunity to test the truth of a solution 
comes so late that there is no time to correct 
mistakes. 

Individuals who do not regard their life’s struc- 
ture from a logical and objective point of view are 
for the most part unable to see the coherence and 
consistency of their behavior pattern. When a prob- 
lem presents itself they are appalled, and instead of 
tackling it they think they have erred in taking a 
road on which they meet problems. In the case of 
children it is also to he remembered that when they 
leave the road of usefulness, they are not in a posi- 
tion to learn positive lessons from negative experi- 
ences simply because they do not understand the sig- 
nificance of problems. It is therefore necessary to 
■ 63 ’ : ■ . 


 
teacli a child to look upon his life, not as a series of 
unconnected events^ but as a continuous thread in- 
terpenetrating all the incidents in his existence. No 
one happening can be taken out from the context of 
his whole life; it can be explained only in relation to 
everything that has gone before. When a child un- 
derstands this he will be able to comprehend why he 
blundered into the wong path. 

Before discussing further the diiference between 
the right and wrong direction for the striving for 
superiority, it may be well to take up the Idnd of be- 
havior which seems to contradict our general theory. 
This is the behavior of laziness — a type of behavior, 
which, on the face of it, seems to contradict the view 
that all children have an innate striving for superior- 
ity. In fact the scolding that a lazy child receives is 
to the effect that he has no striving for superiority, 
that he has no ambition. But if we examine the situa- 
tion of the lazy child more closely, we shall see how 
the ordinary view is mistaken. The lazy child pos- 
sesses certain advantages. He is not burdened with 
other people’s expectations of himself; he is to a cer- 
tain extent excused for not accomplishing so much ; 
he does not struggle, and he therefore assumes a 
negligent, indolent attitude. However, because of 
his laziness he is often successful in pushing himself 


 
into tiie limelight, since his parents find it necessary 
to occupy themselves with him. When w'e consider 
how many children there are who want to have a 
position in the foreground at any price, then we can 
see why some children should hit upon the idea of 
making themselves noticeable by being lazy. 

This, however, is not a complete psychological ex- 
planation of laziness. There are many children who 
adopt a lazy attitude as a means of easing their situ- 
ation. Their apparent incapacity and their lack of 
accomplishment are always attributed to laziness. 
One rarely hears them being accused of incapability; 
on the contrary their families usually say: ‘‘What 
couldn’t he do if he were not lazy?” The children 
content themselves with the recognition that they 
could accomplish everything if only they were not 
lazy. This is balm for the ego of the child who has 
too little confidence in himself. It is a substitute for 
success, not only in the case of children, but for 
adults as well. This fallacious if-sentence, “If I 
were not lazy, what couldn’t I do?” quiets their 
feeling of having failed! When such children really 
do something, their small deed assumes extra sig- 
nificance in their eyes. The one unimportant accom- 
plishment is something of a contrast to their uni- 
form lack of accomplishment before, and as a result 


 
they receive praise for it, while the other cliildreii 
who have always been active receive less recognition 
for greater accomplishments. 

We thus see that there is a hidden and imcompre- 
liended diplomacy in laziness. Lazy children are 
like tigiit-rope w^alkers with a net underneath the 
rope; when they fall, they fall softly. Criticism of 
lazy children is milder than of other children, and 
it insults their ego less. It is less painful to be told 
that one is lazy than that one is incapable. In short 
laziness serves as a screen to hide the child’s lack 
of faith in himself, prohibiting him from making 
attempts to cope with the problems confronting 
him. 

If we consider the current educational methods, 
we shall see that they exactly meet the wishes of the 
lazy child. For the more one scolds a lazj^ child the 
nearer he is to his goal. One occupies oneself with 
him all the time, and the scolding diverts attention 
from the question of his ability, thus fulfilling his 
desire. Punishment works much the same way. 
Teachers who think that they can cure a child of 
laziness by punishing him are always disappointed. 
The severest punishment cannot make an industri- 
ous child out of a lazy one. 

If a transformation takes place it is brought 



 
about by a change in the situation, as, for instance, 
when such a child attains an unexpected success. 
Or again it may happen when he passes from a 
strict teacher to a more gentle one, who under- 
stands the child, talks with him earnestly and gives 
him new courage instead of weakening the little 
courage that he has. In such a situation the change 
from laziness to activity is sometimes surprisingly 
sudden. Thus we have the children who are back- 
ward in the first years of school and who, on com- 
ing to a new school, show themselves unusually 
industrious because of the change of school environ- 
ment. 

Some children who do not seek escape by means 
of laziness avoid useful activity by playing sick. 
Other children are unusually excited at examina- 
tion time because they have a feeling they will be 
shown some preference on account of their nervous 
tension. The same psychological tendency is mani- 
fested by children who cry: the crying and the ex- 
citement are pleas for privilege. 

In the same class with these children are also to 
be put the children who, on the basis of some defect, 
demand special consideration — for example the 
stutterers. Those who have had much to do with 
tiny children wail have noticed that ahnost all chil- 
■ ■ 67 


 
dren show a faint tendency to stutter when they 
begin to speak. The development of speech is, as 
we know, quickened and retarded by many factors, 
principally by the degree of social feeling. Children 
who are socially-minded, who want to make con- 
tact with their fellow human beings will learn to 
speak much more quickly and easily than those who 
avoid others. There are even situations in which 
speech is a superfluous activity ; for example, in the 
case of a child so protected and pampered that his 
every wish is divined and fulfilled before he has 
time to make his desires known (as is necessarily 
done with children who are deaf mutes) . 

When children do not learn to speak before they 
are four or five the parents begin to be afraid of 
deaf -mutism. But they soon notice that they are 
able to hear quite well, which of course excludes the 
hypothesis of deaf-miitism. On the other hand it is 
observed that they are really living in an environ- 
ment in which speech is superfluous. When every- 
thing is handed to a child “on a silver platter,” as 
we say, so that he has no urge to speak, then the 
child will learn to speak very late in life. Speech is 
an indication of the child’s striving for superiority 
and of the direction of its development. He must 
speak in order to express his superiority striving, 



 
whether this expression takes the form of bringing 
joy to Ills family by his utterances or whether it 
takes the form of helping him attain his ordinarj^ 
needs. When there is no possibilitj^ for this type of 
expression in either form, then we can naturally 
expect difficulties in the way of speech develop- 
ment. 

There are other speech defects, such as difficulty 
in the pronunciation of certain consonants, like r, k 
and s. They are all curable, and it is therefore 
rather remarkable that there should he so many 
adults who stutter, lisp or speak unintelligibly. 

Most children grow out of stuttering. A small 
percentage must be treated. What is involved in 
the process of treatment may be illustrated from 
the case of a thirteen-year-old boy. A doctor started 
to treat this boy when he was six years old. The 
treatment lasted a year and was unsuccessful. A 
year followed without professional assistance, then 
another year with another doctor, the treatment 
being again unsuccessful^ The fourth year nothing 
was done, and during the first two months of the 
fifth year he was entrusted to a speech doctor who 
made his condition worse. Some time later he was 
sent to an institute specializing in speech defects, 
I’lie treatment, which lasted two months, was sue- 


 
cessfiil, but after a period of six months there was 
a relapse. 

There followed eight months at the hands of still 
another speech doctor. This time, instead of any 
improvement being noticed, a gradual deteriora" 
tion set in. One more doctor was tried but again 
without success. During the next summer he im- 
proved, but at the end of the vacation period he 
sank back into his old manner of speaking. 

Most of the treatment consisted in having the 
boy read aloud, in slow speaking, exercises, etc. It 
was remarked that some forms of excitement pro- 
duced temporary improvement, only to be followed 
by relapse. The boy had no organic defects, al- 
though as a tiny child he had suffered a fall from 
the second story of a building, which resulted in 
concussion of the brain. 

The boy’s teacher, who had known him for a 
year, described him as ‘'a well-bred, industrious lad 
who blushes easily and is somewhat irritable.” 
French and geography were the boy’s hardest sub- 
jects, he said. At examination time he was specially 
excited. Of his special interests the teacher noted a 
taste for gymnastics and sports and also a liking for 
technical work. The boy did not manifest in any 
way the nature of a leader; he got along well with 
TO 



 
liis schoolmates, but quarrelled occasionally with his 
younger brother. He was left-handed, and the year 
before he had had a stroke of facial paralysis on the 
right side of his face. 

Turning to his family environment, we find the 
father to be a business man, who is very nervous 
and who often scolds the son severely when he stut- 
ters. Despite this the boy has more fear of his 
mother. He has a tutor at home, and as a result he 
can seldom leave the house. He rather misses his 
lack of freedom. ITe also thinks his mother is un- 
fair because she favors the younger boy. 

On the basis of these facts the following explana- 
tion may be offered : The boy’s ready blushing is an 
indication of the increase in tension which comes as 
soon as he must make a social contact. It is, as it 
were, a relative of his stuttering habit. Even a 
teacher whom he likes does not succeed in curing 
him of his stuttering because this stuttering has be- 
come mechanized into his system and expresses his 
general dislike for others. 

We know that the motive for stuttering does not 
lie in the external environment but in the way the 
stutterer apperceives that environment. His irrita- 
bility is psychologically very significant. He is not 
a passive child. His striving for recognition and 


 
superiority expresses itself in irritability, as it does 
with most weak natures. Another proof of his dis- 
couragement is revealed by the fact that he quar- 
rels only with a younger boy. His excitement be- 
fore an examination shows his increased tension due 
to the fear that he will not be successful and the 
feeling that he is not as capable as others. He has a 
strong feeling of inferiority, which diverts his 
striving for superiority in a useless direction. 

Inasmuch as the situation at home is not as agree- 
able as at school, the boy gladly goes to school. At 
home the younger brother occupies the center of the 
stage. It is impossible that an organic wound or 
fright should have been the cause of his stuttering, 
but one or the other may have helped rob him of his 
courage. His younger brother, who has pushed him 
to one side in the family constellation, has had a 
greater effect upon him. 

It is also significant that the boy suffered from 
enuresis (bed-wetting) until he was eight years 
old, a symptom found for the most j^art only in 
those children who were first spoiled and pampered 
and later ‘"dethroned,” The bed-wetting is a sure 
indication that he fought for his mother’s attention 
even at night. It is a sign in this case that the child 
could not reconcile himself to being left alone. 




 

The boy can be cured through encouragement 
and through being taught how to he independent. 
One must put tasks in his way which he can accom- 
plish, and from the accomplishment of which he can 
gain faith in himself. The boy admits that the ar- 
rival of his younger brother was disagreeable to 
him: he must now be made to understand how his 
jealousy has driven him into a false turn. 

There is much to be said about the symptoms 
which accompany stuttering. Thus we want to 
know what happens in a state of excitement. Many 
stutterers when they become angry can scold with- 
out a trace of stuttering showing in their speech. 
Also older stutterers frequently speak flawlessly 
when reciting, or when they are in love. These are 
the facts that indicate that the decisive factor lies in 
their relation to others. The decisive moment is the 
confrontation, the tension aroused in the child when 
he must establish a connection between himself and 
another, or when he must achieve expression by 
means of speech. 

When a child learns to speak without undue dif- 
ficulty no one pays much attention to the progress 
of his speech; but when a child shows difficulties, 
nothing else is mentioned in the house and the stut- 
terer occupies the center of attention. The family 


 
occupies itself exclusively with the child, and the 
result is of course that the child pays too much at» 
tention to his speech. He begins consciously to con- 
trol his expression^ something that children who 
speak normally do not do. We know that the con- 
scious control of functions which should operate 
automatically results in a restriction of the func- 
tion. A pretty example of this is given by Meyriiik 
in his fairy tale, ‘‘The Flight of the Toad.” The 
toad meets an animal with a thousand feet and im- 
mediately begins praising the powers of this re- 
markable animal. “Can you tell me,” asks the toad, 
“which one of your thousand legs you move first, 
and in what order you move the other nine hundred 
and ninety-nine legs?” The millipede begins to 
think and starts observing the movements of his 
legs, and in his attempts to control them he becomes 
confused and cannot move a single one. 

Important as it is to exercise conscious control 
on the course of our life, it is harmful to attempt to 
control each individual movement. We are able to 
produce works of art only when we can automatize 
the physical movements necessary to produce these 
works. 

Despite the disastrous effect which the stuttering 
habit has on the future possibilities of the child and 


 
despite the obvious disadvantages that accompany 
the stuttering during the bringing up of the child 
(the sympathy and the special attention given him 
by liis family), there are still many persons who 
take refuge in excuses rather than to seek to im- 
prove the condition. This applies both to parents 
and to children, both of whom may have no faith in 
the future. The child especially is content to lean 
on others and to maintain an advantage by a seem- 
ing disadvantage. 

How frequently apparent disadvantages may be 
turned to advantage is illustrated in one of Balzac’s 
stories. He tells of two tradesmen who tried to get 
the best of each other in a bargain. While they were 
thus bargaining one of them began to stutter. The 
other one noticed, quite surprised, that the stutterer 
by his stuttering won time enough to think before 
making his point. He searched quickly for a coun- 
ter-weapon, and suddenly he made himself unable 
to hear any more. The stutterer was then at a dis- 
advantage, inasmuch as he had to strain himself in 
* 

order to make the other one hear. Equality was 
thereby re-established. 

Stutterers should not be handled like criminals 
even though they sometimes use this mechanism in 
order to win time for themselves or make others 


 

wait. Children who stutter should be encouraged 
and should be treated gently. Only through friendly 
enlightenment and through increasing the courage 
of the child can successful cures be accomphshed. 




CHAPTER FIVE 


THE INFERIORITY COMPLEX 

T he striving for superiority and the sense of 
inferiority go together in every human being. 
We strive because we feel inferior, and we overcome 
our feeling of inferiority by successful striving. The 
sense of inferiority does not, however, become psy- 
chologically significant unless either the mechanism 
of successful striving is obstructed or unless it is in- 
creased beyond endurance by the psychological re- 
action to organ inferiority. Then we have an 
inferiority complex — an abnormal sentiment of in- 
feriority which necessarily seeks easy compensations 
and specious satisfactions and which at the same time 
obstructs the road to successful accomplishment by 
magnifying the obstacles and decreasing the supply 
of courage. 

Let us consider again in this connection the case 
of the thirteen-year-old boy who stuttered. His dis- 
couragement is, as we have seen, partly responsible 
for his continued stuttering, and his stuttering in- 


 
creases liis discouragement. We thus have here tlie 
usual vicious circle of a neurotic inferiority complex. 
The boy wants to hide himself. He has given up 
hope ; he may even have had thoughts of suicide. The 
boy’s stuttering has become an expression and a con- 
tinuation of his life’s pattern. It makes an impress 
sion upon his environment, it puts him in the center 
of attention, and thus eases his psychological ma- 
laise. 

The boy has set before himself a somewhat over- 
valued and mistaken goal of counting in the world 
and amounting to something. He will always strive 
for prestige, and he must therefore show himself to 
be good-natured, to be able to get along with others, 
to have his work in order. On top of that he feels he 
must have an alibi in case he experiences a defeat, 
and this alibi is bis stuttering. The case of this boy 
is thus ail the more significant because for the most 
part his life is usefully oriented; it is only in one 
phase that his judgment and his courage have de- 
teriorated. 

Stuttering is of course only one of innumerable 
weapons which discouraged children use when they 
do not believe that they will be able to succeed on the 
strength of their own ability. These weapons of dis- 
couragement may be compared to the weapons 


 
which nature has given animals for their protection 
• — claws and horns. It is easy to see how they have 
their origin in the child’s weakness, and his despair 
of being able to cope with life without such extrane- 
ous equipment. And it is remarkable how many 
things may serve for such weapons. There are some 
children who have no other weapon than their lack 
of control of stools and urine. It is an indication that 
they do not want to leave their infancy, the state in 
which one can live mthout work and pain. There is 
seldom any organic weakness of the intestines or 
the bladder in the case of such children. They merely 
resort to these things as tricks which will awaken the 
sympathy of the parent or educator — ^and this de- 
spite the fact that the same tricks may sometimes 
evoke ridicule from their comrades. Such manifesta- 
tions should therefore not be treated as sicknesses 
but as expressions of an inferiority complex, or of 
an endangered striving for superiority. 

We can visualize how the stuttering complaint 
developed, probably out pf a very small physiological 
core. The boy was an only child for a long time, and 
his mother was constantly occupied with him. As he 
grew up he probably felt that he was not receiving 
enough attention, that his expression was being cur- 
tailed, and so he discovered a new trick with which 
■. . 79 


 
to draw attention to himself. Stuttering assumed a 
greater significance; he noticed hov/ the person to 
whom he spoke watched his mouth. By stuttering lie 
was thus able to secure for himself some of the time 
and attention that would otherwise have been de- 
voted to the younger brother. 

It was not otherwise in school. He found a teacher 
who devoted much time to him. Thus as a result 
of his stuttering he was able to assume a role of 
superiority both at home and at school. He missed 
none of the popularity which falls to the lot of good 
students and for which he yearned. He doubtless was 
a good student, but in any case things were made 
easier for him. 

On the other hand, though his stuttering had the 
effect of inducing his teacher to be lenient with liim, 
it is scarcely a method to be recommended. The boy 
is hurt much more than other children when he fails 
to receive what he considers his quota of attention. 
This securing of attention became in fact a sore sub- 
ject with the appearance of the younger brother in 
the family constellation. Unlike normal children lie 
never developed the ability to spread his interest to 
others : he made his mother the most important per- 
son in his family environment, to the exclusion of 
everybody else. 




THE EDUCATION OF CHILDEEN 
One must begin the treatment of such children by- 
increasing their courage and by getting them to be- 
lieve in their own strength and ability. Valuable as 
it is to establish friendly relations with such children 
by means of a sympathetic attitude and not to 
frighten them by stern measures, this is still not 
enough. The friendly relation must be used to en- 
courage the children to make continued improve- 
ment. This can be done only by making the children 
more independent, by bringing them — through vari- 
ous devices — to the point where they necessarily ac- 
quire faith in their own mental and physical powers. 
They simply must be convinced that what they have 
not yet achieved can be readily attained by industry, 
perseverance, practice and courage. 

The worst mistake in  is 
for the parent or educator to prophesy a bad end- 
ing for a child who has strayed on the wrong path. 
Such a stupid prophecy makes the situation in- 
finitely worse since it increases the child’s coward- 
ice. One should do just the opposite: inspire the 
child with optimism. As Virgil said, “they can be- 
cause they think they can.” 

It must never be believed that we can influence a 
child to really improve his conduct by humiliating 
him or shaming him, even though we sometimes see 


 
that cliildren who are afraid of being laughed at seem 
to change their behavior. How unsound is this stimu- 
lation by ridicule may be judged from the following 
case. There was a boy who was constantly being 
teased by his friends because he was not able to swim. 
Finally he could stand the ridicule no longer, and so 
he jumped from the diving board into deep water. 
He was saved from drowning only with great diffi- 
culty. It may be that a coward who is in danger of 
losing his prestige does something to counteract his 
cowardice, but it is seldom the proper act. It is often 
a cowardly, useless way of meeting his original 
cowardice, as we see from the case just cited. The 
real cowardice lay in the fact that the boy was afraid 
to admit that he could not swim because he would 
thereby lose standing among his friends. He did not 
cure that cowardice by desperately jumping into the 
water, but rather reinforced his cowardly propensity 
not to face facts. 

Cowardice is a trait which always destroys human 
relations. A child who is always so worried about his 
own person that he can no longer consider others is 
willing to achieve prestige at the cost of his fellow 
human beings. Cowardice thus brings in its wake an 
individualistic, combative attitude which abolishes 
social feeling, although it is far from abolishing the 



 
fear of others' opinions. A coY^ard is always afraid 
of being ridiculed by people, of being overlooked, or 
being degraded. He is thus always at the mercy of 
of the opinions of others. He is like a person living 
in an enemy country, and he develops the character 
traits of suspicion, envy and selfishness. 

Children of this cowardly type frequently become 
critical and nagging persons, reluctant to praise 
others and resentful if others are praised. It is thus 
a sign of weakness when one wants to surpass others 
not through one’s own accomplishments but through 
degrading the others. To rid children of inimical feel- 
ings towards others is a pedagogical task which can- 
not be avoided by those who have recognized the 
symptoms. He who does not see it is, of course, ex- 
cused, but be will never know how to correct the 
resulting unfavorable character traits. But when 
we know that the problem is to reconcile the child to 
the world and to life, to show him his mistake and to 
explain to him that what he wanted was to have the 
prize of prestige without having worked to achieve 
it, then we also know in what direction to work upon 
the child. We know that we have to strengthen the 
friendly feelings that children should have for one 
another. We know that we also have to teach chil- 
dren not to look down upon another because he has 


 
received a bad mark or because lie lias done soine- 
tliing wrong. Otherwise they build up an inferiority 
complex and they rob the child of his courage. 

When a child is robbed of his faith in the future^ 
the result is that he withdraws from reality and 
builds up a compensatory striving on the useless 
side of life. An educator’s most important task — 
one might almost say his holy duty — is to see to it 
that no child is discouraged at school, and that a 
child who enters school already discouraged regains 
his conddence in himself through his school and his 
teacher. This goes hand in hand with the vocation 
of the educator, for no education is possible except 
with children who look hopefully and joyfully upon 
the future. 

There is a type of discouragement which is only 
temporary, and occurs particularly in the case of 
ambitious children who, despite the progress they 
are making, sometimes lose hope because they have 
passed their last examination and must now turn to 
the choice of an occupation. Also some ambitious 
children often give up the fight for a while, when 
they do not achieve first rank in their examinations. 
The conflict which unconsciously has been long in 
preparation suddenly breaks out. It may express 
itself in complete confusion, or in anxiety neur- 



 
osis. Such cliildren. — if their discouragement is not 
checked in time — will always be starting something 
without finishing it; and -when they are older they 
will change their jobs frequently, never believing 
that anything can end well for them and always fear- 
ing defeat. 

The self-evaluation of a child is then of the great- 
est importance. It is impossible, however, to discover 
what a child really thinks of himself by asking him. 
No matter how diplomatically we go about it we re- 
ceive uncertain or indefinite answers. Some children 
will say that they think rather well of themselves ; 
other children will say that they are worth nothing. 
Investigation in the latter cases may often disclose 
that the adults in their environment have said to 
them hundreds of times, “You aren’t wwth any- 
thing!” or “You are stupid!” 

There are few children who can hear so scathing 
a reproach without being wounded by it. There are 
others, however, who protect and shield their ego by 
undervaluing their ability. 

If questioning a child does not inform us as to 
his judgment of himself, we can, however, observe 
the manner in which he approaches his problem — 
whether, for example, he goes forward in a confi- 
dent, decided manner, or whether he exhibits the sign 


THE EDUCATION OF CHILDBEN 
that is to be found most frequently among dis» 
couraged children, a hesitating manner. Sctiemati- 
cally this may be illustrated by the example of a 
child who starts to go bravely forward, but who 
slows down and falters the nearer he approaches Ills 
tasks and finally stops altogether at some distance 
before actual contact with them. Sometimes such 
children are described as lazy, sometimes as absent- 
minded. The descriptions may be different ; the re- 
sult is always the same. The children do not tackle 
their work as we expect a normal human being to 
do, but are always occupied with obstacles. Some- 
times a child is so successful in fooling his elders that 
they fall into the mistake of thinking him lacking in 
ability. When we keep the whole picture in mind and 
illuminate it by the principles of Individual Psy- 
chology we find that the whole trouble has been the 
lack of confidence — undervaluation. 

When we consider a misdirected striving for su- 
periority we must remember that a completely self- 
centered individual is an anomaly in society. One 
often sees children who, because of an inordinate 
superiority striving, are without consideration for 
any one else. They are inimical, lawbreaking, greedy 
and selfish. When they discover a secret they will 
always use it to hurt some one else. 




 

But in those children whose conduct is most rep- 
rehensible we find a trait which is unmistakably hu- 
man ; somewhere or other they have a feeling of be- 
longing to mankind. The relation of their ego to the 
world around them is implied or expressed in some 
way although the further their life’s scheme is from 
the conception of co-operation, the more difficult it 
is to discover any social feeling. We must look for 
forms of expression which betray the hidden feeling 
of inferiority. These expressions are innumerable. 
They begin with the glance of a child. The eye is not 
only an organ which takes up rays and conducts 
them further but also an organ for social conununi- 
cation. The way a person looks at another shows the 
degree of his inclination to connect himself with the 
other. That is why all psychologists and writers have 
stressed so much the glance of a human being. We 
all judge another person’s opinion of us by the way 
he looks at us and we try to discover a part of his 
soul in his glance. Even though it is possible to make 
mistakes or to misinterpret, it is somewhat easier to 
conclude from the glance of a child whether he is a 
friendly human being. 

It is well Imown that those children who cannot 
look adults directly in the face open themselves to 
suspicion. These are not always children with a bad 


 
conscience or children with the habit of sexual mat 
practice. This glancing away may simply indicate 
an attempt to avoid tying himself, however momen- 
tarily, to another human being. It indicates the 
child’s attempt to withdraw from the society of his 
comrades. How near a child approaches you vdien 
you call him is also an indication. Many children 
remain at some distance, they want to find out first 
what it is all about and will approach only when it 
is necessary. They regard close contact with sus- 
picion because they have had some bad experiences 
and have generalized their one-sided knowledge and 
so misused it. It is also interesting to observe the ten- 
dency of some children to lean, either on the mother 
or on the teacher. The one to whom a child goes more 
willingly is much more important than the one whom 
he says he loves most. 

There are children who reveal a distinct feeling of 
confidence and courage in the way they walk, in their 
erect carriage and well-carried head, in their firm 
voice and lack of timidity. Other children shrink 
when they are spoken to and immediately betray 
their feeling of inferiority, their fear of not being 
able to cope with the situation. 

In investigating this inferiority complex we find 
many who believe that it is innate. The objection to 



 
this opiriion is that any child, no matter how coura- 
geous, can be made afraid. A child whose father and 
mother are timid will probably be timid as well, not 
because he has inherited the timidity but because he 
has gro’ivn up in an atmosphere permeated with 
fear. The atmosphere of the family, and the char- 
acter traits of the parents are most important in the 
development of a child. Children who keep to them- 
selves in school come more often than not from fam- 
ilies having little or no relations with others. It is of 
course a temptation to think of inherited character- 
istics in such cases, but this is an exploded theory. 
No physical changes in the organs or in the brain are 
able to produce an inability to make contact with 
others. There are, however, facts which do not neces- 
sarily compel such an attitude but which make un- 
derstandable the appearance of such a peculiarity. 

The simplest case which will enable us to under- 
stand the matter theoretically is the example of a 
child born with weak organs, who has been sickly 
for some time, and oppressed by life because of pain 
and weakness. Such children are very much occu- 
pied with themselves and look upon the outer world 
as hard and hostile. A second harmful factor plays a 
role in such cases. A weak child must find a person 
who makes life easier for him, who devotes himself 


 
to the child, and who by this very devotion and pro- 
tective attitude develops in the child a strong feel- 
ing of inferiority. All children, because of the dis- 
parity in size and strength between them and adults, 
have a relative feeling of inferiority. This feeling of 
being “less” is easily intensified when a child is told, 
as so frequently happens, “Children should be seen 
and not heard.” 

All these impressions sharpen the child’s percep- 
tion of the fact that he is in a disadvantageous posi- 
tion. The realization that he is smaller and less 
powerful than others is one with which he finds it 
impossible to reconcile himself. The more the idea 
that he is smaller and weaker stings him, the greater 
the efforts that he will make to become more. His 
striving for recognition has received an added im- 
petus. Instead of trying to arrange his life so that it 
harmonizes with the lives of those in his immediate 
surroundings, he creates a new formula, “Think 
only of yourself.” That is a type of child which keeps 
to himself. 

It may he safely stated that the majority of weak, 
crippled and ugly children have a strong feeling of 
inferiority, which expresses itself in two extremes. 
Either they shrink when spoken to, withdraw, are 


 
timid, or they are aggressive. Those are two forms 
of behavior which seem to be totally apart but which 
may be identified by the same cause. In their striv- 
ing for recognition such children betray themselves 
by saying too little one time and too much another. 
Their social feeling is either ineffectual because they 
expect nothing from life and believe that they are 
able to give nothing, or because they subvert the 
feeling to personal use. They want to be leaders and 
heroes, always in the center. 

When a child has been training himself in a wrong 
direction for years, it is impossible to expect that a 
single conversation will change his pattern. The edu- 
cator must have patience. In such cases where the 
children make attempts to improve and have an oc- 
casional relapse, it is sometimes advisable to explain 
to the child that improvement does not come quickly. 
This quiets the child and does not permit him to be 
discouraged. When a child has been deficient in 
mathematics for two years he cannot possibly make 
up the deficiency in two weeks, but that he can make 
it up is indisputable. A normal child, that is to say, 
a courageous one, is capable of making up anything. 
We see again and again that an inability is due to a 
mistaken development, a peculiar, heavy, graceless 


 
formation of the whole personality. It is always pos- 
sible to help behavior-problem cliildren who are not 
feeble-minded. 

Inability or seeming stupidity, clumsiness, apathy 
are not sufficient proof of feeble-imndedness. With 
feeble-minded children there are always physical in- 
dications of faulty brain development. This bodily 
defect may be caused by those glands which affect 
the development of the brain. Sometimes such physi- 
cal defects vanish in the course of time, and what re- 
main are only the psychic traces of the original 
physical deficiency. That is to say, a child who was 
originally weak because of a weak organism may 
continue to act as if he were weak even after his body 
has grown strong. 

We must even go further. Not only may psycho- 
logical inferioritj^ and an egocentric attitude be the 
result of the past history of organic inferiority and 
physical weakness, but they may also be brought 
about by entirely different circumstances that have 
nothing to do with organic inferiority. They may be 
brought about tlirough the wrong kind of nourish- 
ment, or through a loveless and harsh upbringing. 
In such cases, life for the child becomes only a mis- 
ery, and the child assumes a hostile attitude towai-ds 


 
his environment. The effects are similar, if not iden- ■ 
tical, with the disturbance in psychological life re- 
suiting from organic inferiority. 

We have to expect that we shall have great diffi- 
culties in treating those children who have been 
brought up in an atmosphere devoid of love. They 
mil look upon us as they look upon all others who 
hurt them ; every urge to go to school will be felt as 
oppression. They will always feel fettered and will 
always have the tendency to revolt as far as lies in 
their power. They will not be able to assume a correct 
attitude towards their comrades because they envy 
those children who have had a happier childhood. 

Such embittered children often develop into char- 
acters who like to poison the life of others. They have 
not been sufficiently courageous to overcome their 
environment and they try to compensate for their 
own feeling of lack of power by oppressing those 
who are weaker, or by being superior to others 
through an apparent friendliness. This friendliness, 
however, lasts only as long as the others permit 
themselves to be dominated. Many children come to 
the point where they make friends only with those 
who are in worse circumstances, just as there are 
adults who feel themselves particularly drawn to 



 
sufferers. Or they prefer younger, poorer cliildreri. 
Boys, too, sometimes prefer a particularly gentle, 
submissive type of girl, without sex entering into 
their preference. 



CHAPTEE, SIX 


THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE CHILD: PRE- 
VENTING THE INFERIORITY COMPLEX 

W HEN a child takes an unusually long 
time to learn to walk, but can walk nor- 
mally once he has learned, it does not mean that 
the child must develop an inferiority complex for 
the rest of his life. We know, however, that a 
child whose mental development is otherwise nor- 
mal is always strongly impressed by any restric- 
tion in the freedom of movement. He feels that 
his situation is an unhappy one and he is likely to 
draw pessimistic conclusions from it, which may 
tend to govern his future course of action, even 
though the original physical, functional incapacity 
disappears later. There are many children who at 
at one time had rickets and who, though cured, 
still bear the marks of the disease; crooked legs, 
clumsiness, lung catarrh, a certain malformation 
of the head (caput quadratum), curved spine, en- 
larged ankles, feeble joints, bad posture, etc. 


 
Wliat remains psychically is the feeling of defeat 
which they acquired during their illness, and their 
consequent inclination to pessimism. Such chih 
dreii see the ease with which their comrades carry 
on and are oppressed by a feeling of inferiority. 
They undervalue themselves, and take one of two 
courses. Either they completely lose confidence 
and make little if any attempt at progress, or they 
are spurred on by the seeming desperation of their 
plight to catch up with their more fortunate play- 
mates in spite of their physical handicap. Chil- 
dren obviously have not sufficient intelligence to 
be able to judge their situations correctly. 

It is a significant fact that what determines the 
development of the child is neither his own intrinsic 
ability nor the objective environment, but the in- 
terpretation that the child happens to make of the 
external reality and of his relation to it. The po- 
tentialities which a child brings into the world are 
not of primary importance, nor is our adult judg- 
ment of the child’s situation of any importance. 
What is essential is for us to see the child’s situ- 
ation with the eyes of the child himself, and in- 
terpret it with his own mistaken judgment. We 
must not suppose that the child behaves logically 
■ — ^that is to say, according to adult comnion 


 
sense — ^but we must be ready to recognize that 
children make mistakes in interpreting their own 
positions. Indeed, we must remember that the edu- 
cation of children would he impossible were it not 
for the fact that they make mistakes. We could 
not possibly educate or impro^’-e a child if the mis- 
takes lie made were innate. Consequently, he who 
believes in innate character traits cannot and 
should not educate children. 

It is not true that we always find a healthy 
mind in a healthy body. It is possible to find a 
healthy mind in a sick body when a child faces 
life with courage in spite of physical defects. On 
the other hand, if a child is physically healthy, but 
through an untoward set of circumstances has been 
led to make a fallacious interpretation of his abili- 
ties, he will not be mentally healthy. A failure in 
any given task often makes a child believe in his 
own incapacity. This is because such children are 
extraordinarily sensitive to difficulties and re- 
gard each obstacle as ^ confirmation of their lack 
of power. 

Some children in addition to having difficulties 
in motor activities find it hard to learn to speak. 
Learning to speak should usually accompany 
learning to walk. The two are of course not actu- 


THE EDUCATION OF CHILDEEN 
ally connected but are dependent upon the rearing 
of the child and the circumstances of the family. 
Some children who would otherwise have no dif- 
ficulty fail to speak because the family neglects to 
help them. It is clear, however, that any child who 
is not deaf and whose speech organs are otherwise 
perfect should learn to speak at a reasonably early 
age. Under certain circumstances, especially in ex- 
tremely visual types, speech is delayed. In other 
cases, parents spoil the child by saying everything 
for him instead of letting him make the attempt 
to express himself. Such a child takes so long to 
learn to speak that we sometimes think he Is deaf. 
When he finally does learn to speak, his interest 
in spealdng has become so intensified that he 
frequently becomes an orator in later life. Klara 
Schumann, the wife of the composer, could not 
speak until she was four and could speak only a 
little even when she was eight. She was a peculiar 
child, veiy reserved, and she preferred to spend 
her time idling in the kitchen. We can deduce 
from this that no one bothered her. “Peculiar,” 
said her father, “that this striking mental discord 
was the beginning of a life so full of wonderful 
harmony.” Hers is an example of an over-com- 
pensation. 



 

One must be careful to see that children who 
are deaf and dumb receive special schooling, be- 
cause it appears to be more and more the fact that 
complete deafness happens infrequently. Mo mat- 
ter how defective a child’s hearing is, his little 
ability to hear should be nursed to the utmost. Pro- 
fessor Katz, in Rostock, has demonstrated that he 
has been able to train children who were considered 
unmusical to a full appreciation of music and the 
beauty of sound. 

Sometimes children who are successful in most 
of their school subjects fail terribly in one, fre- 
quently in mathematics, thereby arousing the 
suspicion of a light form of imbecility. It is always 
possible that children who are not successful in 
arithmetic have at one time or another been 
frightened by the subject and discouraged in their 
attempts to cope with it. There are families, oc- 
casionally among artists, who boast of the fact 
that they cannot calculate. In addition, the gen- 
eral idea that mathematics is harder for girls than 
lor boys is wi’ong. There are many women who are 
excellent mathematicians and expert statisticians. 
Schoolgirls often hear “boys can count better than 
girls” and are discouraged by the remark. 

It is an important indication whether a child 


 
can use figures or not. Mathematics is one of the 
few fields of knowledge which gives a human being 
security. It is a thought-operation which leads to 
the stabilization of surrounding chaos by rmnibers. 
People with a strong feeling of insecurity are 
usually bad calculators. 

This is true of other subjects too. V^riting, the 
affixing to paper of the sounds known only to inner 
consciousness, gives security to the individual. 
Drawing permits making permanent a fleeting 
optical impression. Gymnastics and dancing are 
expressions of attainment to physical security and, 
more especially, by virtue of the sure control of 
our bodies, of a modicum of mental security. Prob- 
ably this is why so many educators are such firm 
believers in sports. 

A striking manifestation of a feeling of in- 
feriority in children is the difficulty in learning to 
swim. When a child learns to swim easily, it is a 
good sign that he will also be able to overcome 
other difficulties. A child who finds it hard to learn 
to swim shows lack of faith in himself and in his 
swimming instructor. It is noteworthy that many 
children who have difficulty at first, become excel- 
lent swimmers later on. These are the children 
who, sensitive to the original difficulty, have been 



 
spurred on by eventual success to a goal of per- 
fection and who frequently become champion 
swimmers « 

It is important to know whether a child is 
particularly attached to one person or is interested 
in several. Usually, a child is attached most deeply 
to his mother, or, failing her, to another member 
of the family. This ability to attach himself is 
present in every child unless he is an imbecile or an 
idiot. When a child has been reared by his mother 
and attaches himself to another person in the 
family, it is important to discover why. Obviously, 
no child should concentrate all his affection and 
attention on his mother, for a mother’s most im- 
portant function is to spread the interest and 
confidence of the child to his fellowmen. Grand- 
parents also play an important role in the develop- 
ment of a child — ^usually a pampering role. The 
reason for if is that aging people are afraid that 
they are no longer necessary. They develop ex- 
aggerated inferiority feelings and as a result as- 
sume the role of nagging critics or of soft-hearted, 
good-natured elders who, in order to make them- 
selves important to the children, deny them noth- 
ing. Children when visiting grandparents are 
often so spoiled that they refuse to return to their 


 


more disciplined homesc Upon tbeir return they 
complain that it is not as nice at home as it is at 
their grandparents’. We mention here the role that 
grandparents sometimes play in the lives of chil- 
dren so that educators will not overlook this im- 
portant fact in investigating the style of life of 
any particular child. 

Clumsiness in movement (Question Two of the 
Psychological Questionnaire^) resulting from 
rickets and remaining unimproved over a long 
period, usually points to the fact that the child 
received too much care and was therefore pam- 
pered. Mothers should have enough intelligence 
not to kill a child’s independence even when the 
child is ill and needs special attention. 

An important question is whether the child has 
given much trouble (Question Three). When we 
hear that this has been the case we can be sure that 
the mother has been too closely attached to the 
child. She has not been successful in establishing 
independence in him. This, trouble-making usually 
manifests itself when going to sleep or getting up, 
in eating and washing, also in nightmares, or 
enuresis (bed-wetting). All these symptoms point 


* See Appendix I. 





 
to an attempt to get the attention of a certain per- 
som One symptom after another appears; it is as 
if the child were discovering one weapon after 
another to use in his fight to dominate the older 
person. We may foe sure that when a child develops 
such symptoms his environment 's weak. Pimish- 
ment does not help, and such children usually tease 
their parents into punishing them in order to show 
them that this punishment is of no avail. 

An especially important question concerns the 
development of the intelligence of the child. This 
is sometimes difficult to answer correctly and it is 
occasionally advisable to resort to Binet tests, 
which, however, do not always give reliable results. 
This is true of all other intelligence tests which 
should never be accepted as constant for the en- 
tire life of the child. In general, the development 
of intelligence depends a great deal upon family 
circumstances. Families in better circumstances 
are able to help their children, and children with 
good physical development usually show a com- 
paratively good mental development. Unfortu- 
nately, it is also so arranged that those children 
who progress more smoothly in their mental 
growth are predetermined to the “quality work,” 
or better jobs; while those who grow more slowly 


 
are assigned to menial work. As far as we have 
been able to observe, the system newly introduced 
in many countries of having special classes for 
weaker children works out so that most of these 
children come from poor families. The conclusion 
to be drawn is that these poorer children, had they 
been siirrouiided by more favorable environment, 
would undoubtedly have been able to compete suc- 
cessfully with children lucky enough to be born 
into families of better material circumstances. 

Another important point to be investigated is 
whether the child has ever been the butt of ridicule 
or discouraged by teasing. Some children can bear 
such discouragement; others lose courage, avoid 
the difficult roads of useful work, and turn their 
attention to outward appearances, an indication 
that a child has little faith in himself. An indica- 
tion of a hostile environment is to be found when 
a child is constantly quarreling with others, afraid 
that if he is not the aggressor the others will at- 
tack first. Such children are disobedient; they be- 
lieve obedience to be a sign of subordination. They 
think that the courteous return of a greeting is a 
degi'adation, they answer impertinently; they 
never complain because they regard the sympathy 
of others as a personal humiliation. They never 


 
cry ill front of others, and sometimes laugh when 
they should cry, which looks like a lack of feeling, 
hut is only an indication of a fear of showing weak- 
ness. No act of cruelty has ever been done which 
has not been based upon a secret weakness. The 
person who is really strong has no feeling for 
cruelty. Such disobedient children are often dirty, 
personal!'}?' negligent, bite their nails and pick their 
noses, and are very stubborn. They need to be en- 
couraged and it must be made clear to them that 
their actions only indicate their fear of appearing 
as weaklings. 

Question Four, namely, whether the child 
makes friends easily or is unfriendly, whether he 
is a leader or a follower, has to do with his ability 
to make contacts — that is to say, with his degree 
of social feeling or discouragement. It also has to 
do with his desire to obey or to rule. When a child 
isolates himself, he indicates that he has not suffi- 
cient confidence in himself to compete with others, 
and that liis striving for superiority is so strong 
that he fears the subordination of his personality 
in the crowd. Children having a tendency to col- 
lect things indicate that they want to strengthen 
themselves and surpass others. This tendency to 
collect is dangerous because it can very easily go 


 
too far and develop into inordinate ambition or 
greed, the expression of a general feeling of weak” 
ness wliicii seeks a point of support. Such children 
are easily led to steal when they believe that they 
have been neglected or overlooked, because they 
feel this lack of attention more than others. 

Question Five concerns the child’s attitude to 
school. We must notice whether he is tardy and 
whether he is excited about going to school (such 
excitement frequently being an indication of reluc- 
tance). The fears the children have in the face of 
certain situations are variously expressed. When 
they have homework to do, they become irritable; 
they have what seems like a heart palpitation 
caused by the tense state into w^hicli they work 
themselves. One type in particular may have cer- 
tain organic changes, such as sexual excitement. 
The system of giving children marks is not always 
a commendable one. Children would be relieved of 
a great burden if they were not classified in such a 
way. School becomes a sort of constant examina- 
tion or test in which a good mark is necessary to 
strive for, while a bad mark is like a permanent 
judgment. 

Does the child do his homework willingly, or 


 
must lie be forced to do it? To forget to do one’s 
homework shows the tendency to avoid responsi- 
bility. Unsatisfactory school work and impatience 
with it are sometimes means used for escaping 
schools because the child wants to do something 
else. 

Is the child lazy? When a child fails in school 
work, lie prefers to have laziness as the reason 
rather than inability. When a lazy child performs 
one task ivell, he is praised, and then he hears, “He 
could accomplish so much if he were not lazy.” The 
child is satisfied with this opinion because he is 
convinced that he no longer has to prove his ability. 

To this type belong also the indolent children who 
lack courage, who cannot concentrate, who are 
always dependent ; pampered children who disturb 
classroom work because they want to draw atten- 
tion to themselves. 

The question, What is the child’s attitude 
toivard his teacher? is not an easy one to answer. 

Children usually mask their real feelings toward 
their teachers. When a child constantly criticizes, 
and tries to humiliate his school friends, we may 
assume that this tendency to degrade is an indica- 
tion of his own lack of faith in himself. Such 

I 

" ' • ' • ■ , , , I, 


 
children are arrogant, nagging, always know 
everyttiing better than the others. This attitude 
masks their oivn weakness. 

Children more difficult to handle are the indif- 
ferent, apathetic, passive ones. They also wear a 
mask since are not really so indifferent. When 
such children are driven be^mnd control, their re- 
action generally takes the form of a fit of furious 
passion or an attempt at suicide. They never do 
anything until they are ordered to do so. They 
are afraid of setbacks and overvalue other per- 
sons. They must be encouraged. 

Children who show themselves ambitious in 
sport or gyunnastics betray the fact that they have 
been ambitious in other directions, but have been 
afraid of defeat. Children who read far more than 
is customary lack courage and indicate that they 
hope to win power through reading. Such chil- 
dren have a rich imaginative life but are timid in 
facing reality. It is also important to note what 
kind of stories children prefer: novels, fairy tales, 
biographies, travel or objective, scientific works. 
During puberty children are easily attracted to 
pornogi-aphic hooks. It is unfortunate that in every 
large city there are bookstores that make a prac- 
tice of selling such printed matter. The increased 


 
sexual drive and the longing for experience turn 
their thoughts in this direction. The following 
means are to be employed in combatting such harm- 
ful influences: preparation of children for their 
role as fellow men, sexual clarification at an early 
age and friendly relations with their parents. 

Question Six concerns family conditions — sick- 
ness in the family, such as alcoholism, neuroses, 
tuberculosis, lues (syphilis), epilepsy. It is also 
important to have a comprehensive physical his- 
tory of the child. A child who breathes through his 
mouth frequently has a stupid facial expression, 
resulting from adenoids and tonsils which prevent 
correct breathing. An operation to remove such 
obstructions is important, and sometimes the be- 
lief that the operation is going to help him gives 
the child more courage to tackle school upon his 
return. 

Sickness in the family frequently harms the 
progress of a child. Parents who are chronically 
ill burden their children heavily. Nervous and 
psychic disorders oppress the whole family. When- 
ever it is possible, children should not be permitted 
to know that a member of the family has become 
mentally afflicted. A mental disorder casts a 
shadow over the whole family apart from the su- 



 
perstition that it can be inherited. This is also true 
of the innumerable cases of tuberculosis and cancer. 
All such diseases mate a horrible impression on 
the mind of a child and it is sometimes much better 
to take the child out of such a home atmosphere. 
Chronic alcoholism or criminal inclinations within 
a family act like a poison which the child is fre- 
quently unahle to resist. However, there are dif- 
ficulties in the way of the proper placement of 
children taken from such homes. Epileptics are 
usually ii’ritable and disturb the harmony of fam- 
ily life. But what is worst of all is syphilis. Chil- 
dren of syphilitic parents are usually very weakj 
inherit the disease and find it tragically hard to 
cope with life. 

We cannot overlook the fact that the material 
conditions of the family color the child’s outlook 
on life. Poverty in comparison with the better eir- 
eumstances of other children arouses a feeling of 
insufficiency. Children who are moderately well-off 
find it difficult to go without their customary com- 
forts if the family’s finances decline. The tension 
is still greater when grandparents are better off 
than the parents, as in the case of Peter Ghent, 
who could not rid himself of the thought that his 
grandfather was extremely powerful while his 


THE EDUCATION OP CHILDREN 
father failed, in everything. A child often becomes 
industrious as a protest against an indolent father. 

The first contact with death when it comes sud- 
denly is frequently a shock great enough to influ- 
ence the whole life of the child. A child who is un- 
prepared for death and is suddenly brought face to 
face with it, realizes for the first time that life has 
an end. This may discourage the child completely, 
or at least make him very timid. In the biographies 
of doctors we often find that their choice of a pro- 
fession was caused by a brusque meeting with death, 
a proof that a child is deeply affected by his realiza- 
tion of death. It is not advisable to burden children 
with this problem because they are not able to com- 
prehend it entirely. Orphans or step-children often 
blame their unhappiness on the death of their par- 
ents. 

It Is important to know who has the deciding 
voice ill the family. Usually it is the father. When 
a mother or a step-mother dominates, the results 
are abnormal, and the father frequently loses the 
respect of his children. Sons of dominating 
mothers usually carry with them a certain fear of 
women of which they rarely can rid themselves. 
Such men either avoid women or make life un- 
pleasant for the women in their families. 

Ill 


 

It is further necessary to know whether the 
cliiid’s rearing has been strict or mild. Individual 
Psychologists do not believe that either severe or 
mild methods should be used in rearing children. 
What is necessary is understanding, avoidance of 
mistakes and constant encouragement of the child 
to face and solve his problems and develop social 
feeling. Parents who nag their children harm them., 
for they discourage the children completely. A 
pampering education develops a dependent at- 
titude and a tendency to cling to one person. Par- 
ents should avoid both the painting of rosy pic- 
tures and the describing of the %vorld in pessimistic 
terms. Their job is to give the child as good a 
preparation for life as possible, so that the child 
will be able to take care of himself. Children who 
have not been taught how to face difficulties will 
seek to avoid every hardship, which leads to an 
ever-narrowing circle of activity. 

It is important to know who has charge of the 
children. It is not necessarjr that a mother be con- 
stantly with her children, hut she must know the 
person in whose care she places them. The best 
way to teach a child is to let him learn from experi- 
ence, within reason, so that his conduct is guided 


 
not by tlie restrictions placed upon film by others 
but by tlie logic of facts. 

Question Seven concerns the position of the child 
in the family constellation, which is most sug- 
gestive of the child’s character. An only child is 
ill a peculiar situation; a youngest child, an only 
boy among girls or an only girl among boys, are 
also ill peculiar positions. 

Question Eight concerns the choice of an oc- 
cupation. This is an important question because it 
reveals to us the influence of the environment, the 
amount of the child’s courage and social feeling, 
and the life rhythm of the child. Day-dreams (ques- 
tion nine) are also significant, as well as early 
childliood remembrances (question ten). Those 
people who have learned to interpret childhood 
remembrances can frequently discover from them 
the entire style of life. Dreams are also an indica- 
tion of the direction in which a child is going, an 
indication of whether he is attempting to solve or 
to evade his problem. It is important to know 
whether a child has speech defects; further, 
whether he is ugly or good-looking, well-formed 
or badly-formed (question thirteen). 

Question Fourteen. Will the child discuss his 


THE EDUCATION OF CHILDBEN 
situation openly or not? Some children are given to 
boasting as a compensation for their feeling of in- 
feriority. Others refuse to talk, fearing that they 
will be taken a,dvantage of, or fearing a new hurt 
if they betray their weakness. 

Question Fifteen. A child who is successful in 
one subject, say in drawing or music, must be en- 
couraged on the basis of this to improve in his other 
subjects. 

Children who at the age of fifteen do not know 
what they want to become, are to be regarded as 
completely discouraged and must be treated ac- 
cordingly. The occupation of the members of the 
family as well as the social differences in rank be- 
tween the brothers and sisters, must be considered. 
The whole development of a child can be harmed 
by the unhappy marriage of the parents. It is the 
duty of the teacher to proceed with prudence, to 
form a correct picture of the child and his environ- 
ment, and to arrange his treatment and his at- 
tempts to improve the child in accordance with 
the knowledge gained from the questionnaire. 




CHAPTEB, SEVEH 


SOCIAL FEELING AND THE OBSTACLES 
TO ITS DEVELOPMENT 

I N contrast to the cases of superiority striving 
we have discussed in the previous chapters, 
there is to be found a tendency among many chiL 
dren and adults to unite themselves with other 
human beings, to accomplish their tasks in co- 
operation with others and to make themselves 
generally useful from a social point of view. Such 
manifestations may best be described by the term 
social feeling. What is the root of this feeling? 
This is a matter of some controversy. But so far 
as the present wi’iter has been able to discover, it 
seems that we have to do here with a phenomenon 
that is indissolubly connected with the very notion 
of man. 

One may perhaps ask in what sense such a psy- 
chological sentiment is more innate than the 
psychological striving for superiority. The an- 
swer -would be that both at bottom have the same 

.. 116 ■ ■■ 


 
core — that the individualistic desire for supremacy 
and the feeling of social-mindedness rest on the 
same basis in human nature. They both are ex™ 
pressions of a root desire for affirmation ; they dif- 
fer in their form, and their different forms involve 
different implicit judgments about human nature. 
Thus the individualistic striving for supremacy 
involves a judgment that the individual can do 
without the group, while the feeling of social^ 
iiiindedness involves the view of a certain depend- 
ence upon the group. As views on human nature, 
there is no doubt that the social feeling is superior 
to the individualistic striving. The former rep- 
resents a sounder and logically more fundamental 
outlook, while the latter is only a superficial view- 
point even though as a psychological phenomenon 
it is more often to be met with in the lives of in- 
dividuals. 

If we want to see in what sense the social feel- 
ing has truth’ and logic on its side we have only to 
observe man historically, and we shall notice that 
man has always lived in groups. Nor is this fact 
astonishing when we reflect further that those 
creatures who individually are not able to protect 
themselves have been compelled always to live to- 
ne 


 
getlier for self-preservation. We have only to coni” 
pare a human being with a lion to realize that man, 
regarded as a species of animal, is quite insecure, 
and that most other animals comparable in size to 
man are stronger and better armed by nature for 
physical offense and defense. Darwin observed 
that all animals whose defense equipment has been 
somewhat neglected by nature always travel in 
packs. The orang-utan, for example, with his ex- 
traordinary bodily strength, lives alone with his 
mate, while the smaller and weaker members of the 
ape family are always to be found in groups. The 
formation of groups serves, as Darwin has pointed 
out, as a substitute or compensation for that which 
nature has denied to the animals individually — 
claws, fangs, wings, etc. 

The formation of groups not only balances what 
the particular animals lack as individuals, but it 
also leads them to discover new methods of protec- 
tion which improve their situation. There are 
groups of monkeys, for instance, who know how 
to send out advance scouts to discover the presence 
of enemies. In this way they are able to bring to 
bear their massed strength so as to more than make 
up for the weakness of each member of the group. 



 
We also find a buffalo herd massing itself together 
and thus defending the group successfully against 
individual enemies of far greater power. 

Animal sociologists who have studied this prob- 
lem also report that in these groups we often find 
arrangements which are the equivalent of laws. 
Thus the scouts that are sent ahead must live ac- 
cording to certain rules, and every blunder or in- 
fraction is punished by the whole herd. 

It is interesting to note in this connection that 
many historians assert that the oldest laws of man- 
kind were those which affected the watchmen of 
the tribe. If this is so, we have a picture of the in- 
vention of the group idea out of the inability of 
weaker forms of animal life to protect themselves. 
And in a certain sense the feeling of social-minded- 
ness is always a reflection of physical weakness and 
is inseparable from it. Thus in the case of human 
beings perhaps the most important situation that 
fosters social feeling is the helplessness and slow 
development of infants and children. 

In the whole realm of animal life we find no 
being except man whose young come into the 
world with such complete helplessness. Also, as we 
know, the human child requires the longest time to 
reach maturity. This is not because of the infinite 


 
niimber of things a child must leam before he be- 
comes an adult, but because of the way he de- 
velops. Children need the protection of the parents 
Hiiicli longer because . their organism demands it, 
and the Iiiimaii race would die out if children were 
not afforded such protection. The physical weak- 
ness of the child may be taken as the occasion 
which links together education and social-minded- 
ness. Education is a necessity because of the 
child’s physical immaturity, and the goal of educa- 
tion is provided by the fact that the overcoming of 
the child’s immaturity can only be had by relying 
on the group. Education must necessarily be social 
in purpose. 

In all our rules and methods for the education 
of children we must always have the idea of com- 
munity life and social adjustment to it. Whether 
we know it or not we are always impressed more 
favorably by that which is good from the stand- 
point of the community, and less favorably by an 
act which is generally disadvantageous or harmful 
to society. 

All educational mistakes which we observe are 
mistakes only because we judge that they will pro- 
duce harmful effects on the community. All great 
accomplishments, and in fact all development of a 



 
human being’s abilities take place under the pres- 
sure of social life and in the direction of social 
feeling. 

Let us take, for example, speech. A human 
being living alone needs no knowledge of speech. 
That human beings have developed speech is an 
indisputable indication of the necessity for com- 
munal life. Speech is a distinct bond between peo- 
ple and at the same time a product of tlieir living 
together. The psychology of speech is conceivable 
only when we use as a point of departure the idea 
of the community. Individuals living alone have 
no interest in speech. Whenever a child lacks this 
broad base of participation in the community and 
grows up isolated, his ability to speak will be re- 
tarded. What we call a talent for speaking can 
only be acquired and improved when one individ- 
ual attaches himself to others. 

It has been commonly assumed that those chil- 
dren who can express themselves better than others 
are simply more talented,. This is not true. Those 
children who find difiiculty in speaking or in mak- 
ing contact through speech usually do not have 
strong social feeling. Children who do not learn 
to speak well are frequently spoiled children, for 
whom their mothers do everything before the chiT 


 
dreii have time to ask for anything. In this way 
they lose contact and the ability for social adjust- 
iiient because they do not need speech. 

There are also some children who are reluctant 
to speak because their parents never permit them 
to finish a sentence or to answer for themselves; 
others have been laughed at or ridiculed, and 
thereby discouraged. This constant correcting and 
nagging seems to be a widely spread malpractice 
in . The dire result is that 
such children carry with them for years a feeling 
of degradation and inferiority. One can notice it in 
such persons who use the stereotyped introduction 
before they begin a sentence: “But, please don’t 
laugh at me.” We hear this frequently and we 
recognize at once that such people were laughed at 
frequently when they were children. 

There is the case of a child who could speak and 
hear but whose parents were both deaf and dumb. 
He alway’-s cried without making any sound when 
he hurt himself. It was necessary to let his parents 
see the pain, but useless to make his suffering 
audible. 

The development of other abilities of human 
beings, for example, the growth of understanding 
or of a logical sense, is unthinkable without social 





 
feeling. A man living absolutely alone lias no need 
of logic, or at least has no more need than any other 
animal. On the other hand, a man who is always 
in contact with others, who must use speech and 
logic and common sense in his dealings with others, 
must develop or acquire social feeling. This is the 
final goal of all logical thought. 

Occasionally the actions of people appear stupid 
to us when in reality these actions are quite intel- 
ligent in the light of their personal goals. This fre- 
quently happens with those people who think that 
everybody else must think as they do, which shows 
us how significant the factor of social feeling or 
common sense is in judgment (not to mention that 
the development of common sense would not be 
necessary if communal life were not so complicated 
and did not present the individual with so many 
intricate problems). We can very well imagine 
that primitive people have remained at a primitive 
level because the relative simplicity of their ex- 
istence did not stimulate them to deeper thought. 

Social feeling plays a most important part in 
the ability of human beings to speak and to think 
logically — two functions which we might almost 
regard as holy. If everyone attempted to solve his 
problems regardless of the community in which he 


 
lived, or to use a language of his own, chaos would 
resiihL Social feeling gives a security which each 
individual can feel and which is for him the main 
support ill life. It may not he completely identical 
with the confidence that we derive from logical 
thought and truth, but it is the most palpable 
component of that confidence. To take an illustra- 
tion, why are calculating and counting so coil”* 
fidently accepted on ail sides so that we tend to 
regard as precisely true only that which we can 
express in numbers? The reason is that number 
operations are more easily communicable to our 
fellow men, at the same time that they are easier 
for the mind to work with. We do not have much 
confidence in truths which we cannot communicate 
to others and have others share with us. This train 
of thought was doubtless behind Plato’s attempt to 
model all philosophy on number and mathematics. 
We see the connection with social feeling even 
more closely from the fact that he wanted the 
philosopher to go back to the “cave,” that is to 
say, to participate in the life of his fellow men. 
Even the philosopher, he felt, could not live prop- 
erly without the security that comes from social 
feeling. 

Cliildren who have, so to speak, less of an ac- 


 
cumulation of this feeling of security, reveal it 
when they come in contact with others or when 
they have to perform certain tasks on tlieir own 
initiative. They reveal it particularly in school in 
those subjects which require objective, logical 
thinking, as in mathematics. 

The conceptions for which a human being is 
prepared in childhood (for example, moral feel- 
ings, ethics, etc.) are usually presented in a one- 
sided manner. An ethics for a human being who is 
condemned to live alone is inconceivable. Morals 
are only in place when we think of the community 
and the rights of others. This view is a little more 
difficult to confirm when we think of aesthetic feel- 
ings, of our inclination to artistic creations. How- 
ever, even in the realm of art w’e can perceive a 
generally consistent impression which probably has 
its basic roots in an understanding of health, 
strength, correct social development, etc. So far 
as art is concerned the boundaries are elastic, and 
there is perhaps more room for individual taste. On 
the whole, however, even esthetics follows social 
lines. 

If the practical question is put to us — ^how can 
we tell the degree to which social feeling has been 
developed in a child? — ^we must answer that there 


 
are certain conduct manifestations to be con- 
sidered. When we see, for example, that children, 
in their striving for superiority, force themselves 
to the front with no consideration for others, we 
may be sure that they have less social feeling than 
those children who avoid that particular procedure. 
It is impossible to imagine a child in our present 
civilization without some desire for individualistic 
supremacy. As a result, his degree of social feel- 
ing is usually not sufficiently developed. This is 
the condition which the critics of mankind, the old 
and modern moralists have always complained of 
— that man is by nature egotistical and thirties 
more of himself than he does of others. This has 
always been expressed in the form of a sermon 
which has no effect on children or adults, because 
nothing can be accomplished with this axiom alone, 
and people have eventually consoled themselves by 
thinking that everybody else is no better. 

When we deal with children whose ideas have 
become so confused that they have developed 
harmful or criminal tendencies, we must recognize 
that no amount of moral preaching has ever had 
any effect. In such a situation it is much more 
desirable to probe a little deeper in order to he able 
to abolish the evil by pulling up the roots. In other 


 
words, we must relinquish our role of judge and 
assume that of comrade or doctor. 

If we constantly tell a child that he is bad or 
stupid, he will become convinced in a short time 
that we are right and he will not have sufficient 
courage thereafter to tackle any task presented to 
him. What happens then is that the child fails in 
whatever he tries to do. The belief that he is stupid 
takes firmer root. He does not understand that the 
environment originally destroyed his self-con- 
fidence and that he is subconsciously arranging his 
life to prove this fallacious judgment correct. The 
child feels himself less able than his comrades, he 
feels himself restricted in abilities and possibilities. 
His attitude shows unmistakably his depressed 
frame of mind, which is in direct proportion to the 
amount of pressure exerted upon him by an un- 
favorable environment. 

Individual Psychology has tried to show that the 
influence of the environment is always perceptible 
in every mistake made hy^a child; for example, a 
disorderly child is always in the shadow of a per«» 
son who puts his things in order ; a child who lies is 
always under the influence of a domineering adult 
who wants to cure the child of lying by harsh 
means. We can even detect traces of the environ- 




THE EDUCATION OF CHILDBEN 
merit in a cliiH’s boasting. Such a child usually 
feels that praise is a necessity, and not the success- 
ful accomplishment of any given task; and in his 
striving for superiority he is constantly seeking to 
evoke laudatory comments from the members of 
his family. 

There are situations in the life of every child 
which parents have usually overlooked or misun- 
derstood. Thus, each child in a family of brothers 
and sisters is in a different situation. The first 
child has the unique position of having been for a 
while the only child. This experience is unknown 
to a second-born. The youngest child experiences 
a set of circumstances which not every child goes 
through, because he remains for a while the small- 
est and weakest in the environment. There are 
variations of these situations. When two brothers 
or two sisters grow up together, the one who is 
naturally older and more competent has overcome 
certain difficulties which the younger has still to 
conquer. The younger of two such children is in 
a relatively unfavorable position and feels it. To 
compensate for this feeling of inferiority, the child 
may increase his striving so as to overtake the older 
brother or sister. 




 

Individual psychologists who have worked for 
a long time with children are usually able to detect 
the position that children have had in the family 
constellation. Wlien the older child is one that has 
made normal progress, the younger one has been 
stimulated to greater effort to keep up with the 
older. As a result the younger is usually more ac» 
tive and more aggressive. If the older child has 
been weak and has developed slowly, the younger 
is not forced to make quite so strong an effort in 
competition. 

It is, therefore, important to determine what 
position a child has had in the family since a child 
can be completely understood only when his place 
in the family constellation has been discovered. 
The youngest children in families bear umnistak- 
able signs of the fact that they have been the 
youngest. Of course there are exceptions but the 
most common type of the youngest child is the one 
who wants to surpass all the others, the one who 
is never quiet, who is always stirred to further ac- 
tion by the feeling and belief that he must eventu- 
ally amount to more than all the others. These 
observations are significant for the education of 
children because they condition the adoption of 
certain educational methods. It is impossible to 


 
follow the same rules in handling all children. 
Each child is unique, and while we classify chil- 
dren according to certain general types, we must 
be careful to treat each child as an individual. This 
is a condition almost impossible to fulfill in the 
school, but certainly one obtainable at home. 

The youngest child belongs to the type which 
always wants to be in the foreground of any pic- 
ture and in many cases he is successful. This is an 
extraordinarily important consideration since it 
weakens considerably the notion of the inheritance 
of mental characteristics. When youngest children 
of different families bear so much resemblance to 
each other there is not much room for the belief in 
inheritance. 

Another type of youngest child, directly op- 
posite to the active one described above, is the com- 
pletely discouraged adolescent. Such a child is as 
indolent as possible. We can understand that the 
seemingly great difference between these two types 
is explainable psychologically. No one is so easily 
hurt by difficulties as he who has the inordinate 
ambition to excel all others. His ambition makes 
him unliappy, and when the obstacles seem almost 
insurmountable be takes to flight more quickly 
than one whose striving does not have such an im- 


 
portant goal We see in these two' types of young- 
est child the personification of the Latin saying 
“Aiit Csesarj aut nullus” or, as we say^ or 
nothing.” 

In the Bible we can find excellent descriptions 
of youngest children which coincide exactly with 
our experience — for example, the stories of Jo-- 
seph, David, Saul, etc. The objection that may be 
raised that Joseph had a younger brother, Ben^ 
jamin, may be refuted by the fact that Benjamin 
was born when Joseph was seventeen years old, 
so that Joseph as a child was the youngest^ How 
often do we see in life families supported by the 
youngest child. We find confirmation for our as- 
sertion concerning the youngest child not only in 
the Bible but also in fairy tales. There is no fairy 
tale in which the youngest child does not surpass 
all his brothers and sisters — ^in German, Russian, 
Scandinavian or Chinese fairy tales the youngest 
is always the conqueror. It is impossible that this 
should he only coincidence^. It is probably caused 
by the fact that in former days the figure of the 
youngest child was much more salient than it is 
to-day. This type must have been better observed 
because it was probably easier to notice under 
primitive conditions. 




 

Much more could be written about the charac“ 
teristics which children deyelop in accordance with 
their position in the family constellation. Oldest 
cliildren also have many characteristics in common 
and may be divided into two or three main types. 

The present witer bad been studying the matter 
for a long time and the subject was not quite clear 
in his mind when he accidentally stumbled upon 
a passage in Fontane’s autobiography. Fontane 
describes there how his father, a French emigrant, 
took part in a war of Poland against Russia. His 
father was always very happy when he read, for 
example, that ten thousand Poles had beaten fifty 
thousand Russians and put them to flight. Fontane 
could not understand Ms father’s joy. On the con- 
trary, he objected very much on the ground that 
fifty thousand Russians simply had to be stronger 
than ten thousand Poles, and “if that isn’t so, it 
doesn’t please me at all because the stronger should 
always remain the stronger.” In reading this para- 
graph we immediately^ junip to the conclusion, 
“Fontane is an oldest child I” Only an oldest child 
could make such a statement. He remembers his 
possession of power in the family when he was the 
only child and feels it an injustice to be dethroned 
by a iveaker person. As a matter of fact it has been 


 
found that oldest children usually have a conserva- 
tive trait. They are believers in power, in rule, and 
in unbreakable laws. They have a tendency to ac- 
cept despotism quite frankly and without apology. 
They have the right attitude for positions of power 
because they have once occupied such positions 
themselves. 

There are exceptions, as we have said, in the 
types of oldest children. There is one exception 
which should be mentioned here. It concerns a 
problem in child life which has hitherto been neg- 
lected. This is the tragic role which an older boy 
plays when he has a younger sister. Descriptions of 
confused, completely discouraged boys have very 
often indicated, without the fact itself being men- 
tioned, that the trouble was a younger, clever 
sister. The frequency with which this occurs is not 
an accident because there is a natural explanation 
for it. We know that in our present civilization 
men are considered of more importance than 
women. A first-horn son is frequently pampered. 
His parents expect a great deal of him. His situ- 
ation is a favorable one until a sister suddenly ap- 
pears. The girl enters an environment which con- 
tains a spoiled older brother who regards her as an 
amioying intruder and who fights against her. 



 
This situation spurs the girl on to make extraordi- 
nary effortSs and if she does not break down, this 
stimulation affects her whole life. The girl de- 
velops rapidly and frightens the older boy, who 
suddenly sees the fiction of masculine superiority 
destroyed. He becomes uncertain, and since nature 
has so arranged matters that girls between the 
ages of foui'teeii and sixteen develop mentally and 
physically more rapidly than boys, his uncertainty 
is likely to end in a complete defeat. He easily 
loses his belief in himself and gives up the fight, 
arranges plausible excuses, or puts difficulties in 
his own way which he can then use as alibis for 
ceasing to struggle. 

There is a great number of such first-born boys 
who are confused, hopeless, inexplicably lazy, or 
suffering from nervousness for no other reason than 
that they did not feel strong enough to compete 
with a younger sister. Such boys are sometimes 
possessed of an unbelievable hatred of the female 
sex. Their fate is usualjy a sad one because there 
are few people who understand their condition and 
can explain it to them. Sometimes it goes so far 
that parents and other members of the family com- 
plain, “Why isn’t it the other way around? Why 
isn’t the boy a girl, and the girl a boy ?” 



 
Boys who are alone among several sisters also 
have characteristics in common. It is difficult to 
prevent a dominantly feminine atmosphere in a 
house where there are several girls and only one 
boy. It either happens that he is very much spoiled 
by all the members of the family, or that all the 
women exclude him. Such boys naturally develop 
differently, but certain traits are common to all of 
them. We know that the conception that boys 
should not be educated by women exclusively is 
very widespread. That is not to be taken literally, 
since all boys are first reared by women. But what 
is really meant is that boys should not he brought 
up in an environment of women. This is not an 
argument against femininity but against the mis- 
understandings which arise out of such a situation. 
It also holds good for a girl who grows up with 
boys. The boys usually look down upon the girl 
and she tries, as a result, to imitate the boys in 
order to be their equal, which is an unfortunate 
preparation for her later Hfe. 

No matter how tolerant one is, it is impossible 
to join in the chorus of those who believe that girls 
should be brought up like boys. One can do it for 
a while hut certain unavoidable differences make 


 


tliemselves quickly apparent. Men have different 
roles to play in life determined by tlieir difference 
in physical structure. This plays a part in the 
choice of a profession and girls who are not satis- 
fied with their feminine role sometimes find great 
difficulty in adjusting themselves to the occupa- 
tions open to them. When we come to the question 
of preparation for marriage, it is clear that the 
education for the role of a woman must be different 
from that for the part of a man. Girls who are 
dissatisfied with their sex will object to marriage 
as a personal degradation or if they do marry 
they will try to rule. Boys who have been brought 
up. like girls will also experience great difficulty in 
adjusting themselves to our present form of civili- 
zation. 

We must not forget in considering all this that a 
child’s style of life is usually determined by the 
time he is four or five years old. Those are the 
years during which he must develop social feeling 
and the flexibility necq^sary for adjustment. By 
the time a child is five years old his attitude to his 
environment is usually so fixed and mechanized 
that it proceeds in more or less the same direction 
for the rest of his life. His apperception of the 


) 



 
outer world remains the same; the child is caught 
in the trap of his perspectives and repeats unceas- 
ingly his original mental mechanisms and the re- 
suiting actions. Social feeling is limited by the 
boundaries of the individuaFs mental horizon. 



CHAPTER EIGHT 


THE CHILD’S POSITION IN THE FAMILY: 
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF TPIE SITUATION AND 
THE REMEDY 

W E have seen that children develop in ac- 
cordance with their unconscious inter- 
pretation of the position they occupy in relation 
to their environment. We have also seen that first, 
second and third children develop differently, each 
in accordance with his particular position in the 
family constellation. This early condition may be 
regarded as a test of the character developed by 
the child. 

The education of a child cannot begin too soon. 
As a child grows he develops a certain set of rules 
or formulas which regulate his conduct and deter- 
mine his reactions to various situations. When a 
child is very young there are only slight indications 
of the particular mechanism he is constructing to 
guide his future behavior. Later on, as the result of 
years of training, this behavior pattern becomes 


 
fixed and he no longer reacts objectively but in ac- 
cordance with Ms unconscioiis interpretation of 
the sum total of Ms. past experiences*, W'hen a child 
has made a false interpretation of any particular 
situation or of Ills own ability to cope with a par- 
ticular difficulty, this erroneous judgment ivill 
determine his conduct and no amount of logic or 
common sense can change the adult conduct until 
the original, childish misinterpretation is corrected. 

There is always something subjective in the de- 
velopment of a child and it is this individuality 
which pedagogues must investigate. It is this in- 
dividuality which prevents the application of gen- 
eral rules in the education of groups of children. 
This is also the reason why the application of the 
same rule results differently with different chil- 
dren. 

On the other hand when we see children reacting 
to the same situation in almost the same way we 
cannot say that this is because of a law of nature ; 
what is true is that human beings are prone to make 
the same mistakes because of their common lack of 
understanding. It is customarily believed that a 
child always becomes jealous when another child 
appears in the family. One objection to this gen- 
eralization is that there are exceptions; another, 


 
that a knovHedge of liow to prepare children for 
the arrival of a younger brother or sister would 
make jealousy impossible. A child who makes a 
mistake may be compared to a person who finds 
himself in the mountains in front of a footpath. He 
does not know where or how to proceed. When he 
has finally found the right path and has come to 
the next town, he hears people say in astonishment : 
“illmost everyone who wanders off that path gets 
lost.” Mistakes made by children are often along 
such enticing paths. They look easy to tread, and 
thus attract the child. 

There are many other situations which have im- 
measurable influences upon the character of a 
child. How often do we see two children in a fam- 
ily, one who is good and one who is bad? If we in- 
vestigate the circumstances a little more closely, 
we find that the bad child has an intense desire for 
superiority, wants to dominate all the others and 
uses all his power to rule the environment. The 
house is noisy with his cries. The other child, by 
way of contrast, is quiet, modest, the family’s 
favorite, and held forth as an example to the other. 
The parents do not know how to explain such op- 
posites in the same family. Upon examination we 
see that the good child has discovered that he is able 


 
to gain much more recognition liis excellent be- 
havior and competes successfully with Ills bad 
brother or sister, as the case may he. It is under- 
standable that when there is a rivaliy of this nature 
between two children the first child has no hope of 
surpassing the second by being better than the sec- 
ond, and so he strives to excel him in the opposite 
direction, that is to say, by being as naughty as 
possible. It has been our experience that such 
naughty children can be turned into even better 
children than their brothers and sisters. It is also 
our experience that a strong desire for superiority 
may express itself in one extreme direction or the 
other. We see the same thing in school. 

It is impossible to predict that two children will 
be exactly the same because they grow up under 
the same conditions. No two children grow up 
under exactly the same conditions. The character 
of a weli-hehaved child is greatly influenced by the 
presence of an ill-behaved one. As a matter of fact, 
there are many children who were originally well- 
behaved and who afterwards turned into problem 
children. 

There is the case of a seventeen-year old girl 
who was a model child up to the time she was ten 
years old. She had a brother eleven years older who 



THE EDUCATIOx^ OF CHILDREN 
had been badly spoiled because be bad been the 
only child for eleven years. The boy was not 
jealous of bis sister when she arrived; be merely 
continued his usual behavior. When the little girl 
reached her tenth year the brother began to be 
away from home for long periods. She assumed 
the position of an only child, and this situation had 
the effect of making her want to have her own way 
at any price. She grew up in a rich home, so that 
when she was a child it was easy to fuldll her 
every desire. When she grew older this was not 
always possible and she began to show her dissatis- 
faction. She commenced to incur debts at an early 
age on the strength of her family’s financial repu- 
tation, and in a short time she owed a considerable 
sum of money. This means nothing more than that 
she chose another road to fulfill her wishes. Her 
good behavior vanished when her mother refused 
to accede to her demands. There were quarrels, 
tears and the girl developed into a most unpleasant 
cliaracter. 

The general conclusion to be drawn from this 
case and other cases resembling it, is that a child 
can satisfy his superiority striving by good be- 
havior and that we are therefore never sure 


 
wlietlier sucli good behavior will continue when 
there is a change in the situation.. The advantage 
of our psychological questionnaire is that it gives 
us a more comprehensive picture of the child and 
his activities, as well as his relation to his environ- 
ment and to all its members. There will always be 
certain indications of his style of life, and when we 
have studied the child and the information gained 
from the questionnaire we will find that his char» 
acter traits, emotions and style of life are all tools 
used by him to promote his striving for superiority, 
increase his feeling of importance and obtain pres- 
tige in his world. 

There is a type of child frequently met with in 
school who seems to contradict this description® 
This is the indolent child who is reserved, im- 
pervious to knowledge, discipline, or correction, 
who lives in a world of his own fantasy, and at no 
time displaying a striving for superiority. With 
enough experience, however, it is possible to per- 
ceive that this is also a form of striving, even 
thougli an absurd one. Such a child has no faith 
in his ability to achieve success by the usual means, 
and as a result he avoids all means and opportuni- 
ties for improvement. He isolates himself and gives 
the impression of a hardened character. This hard- 



 
ness, liowever, does not include his whole person- 
ality; behind it one usually can find an extraordi- 
narily sensitive, trembling spirit which needs this 
outer callousness to protect itself from hurt. He 
encloses himself in an armor and nothing can come 
near him. 

IVhen one succeeds in finding a way to induce 
this type to speak, one finds that he is very much 
occupied with himself, daydreams constantly and 
creates fantasies in which he always appears great 
or superior. Reality is far from the daydreams of 
such children. They make believe that they are 
heroes, conquering all others ; or tyrants who have 
robbed all others of power ; or martyrs helping the 
suffering. The inclination to play the savior is to 
be found frequently among children, not only in 
their daydreaming hut in their actions. There are 
children who can be depended upon to spring to 
the rescue when another is in danger. Children who 
played the role of rescuer in their daydreams train 
themselves for the part in reality and, when not too 
discouraged, act the part when the opportunity 
offers. 

Certain daydreams recur continually. In Austria 
during the time of the monarchy there were many 
children who had daydreams of saving the king 


i ’ 






 
or one of the princes from danger. The parents, of 
course, never know that their children have such 
ideas. All that is to be seen is that children who day- 
dream a lot cannot adjust themselves to reality and 
are unable to make themselves useful. In such cases 
there is a wide gap between fantasy and reality. 
Children sometimes choose the middle road; they 
retain their daydreaming while making a partial 
adjustment to reality. Others make no adjustment 
at ail and withdraw more and more from the world 
into a private world of their own creation, while 
still others want to have nothing to do with prod“ 
ucts of the imagination and occupy themselves 
only with reality — stories of travel, or of hunting, 
history, efcc. 

There is no doubt that a child should have some 
imagination as well as a willingness to accept 
reality, but we must not forget that children do 
not regard these things as simply as we do and are 
prone to divide the world sharply into two ex- 
tremes. A most important fact which should be 
borne in mind in imderstanding children is that 
they have a strong tendency to divide everything 
into opposites (above or below, all good or all 
bad, clever or stupid, superior or inferior, all or 
nothing). Adults also use this same antithetic 


 
sclieme of apperception. It is well known that it is 
difficult to rid ourselves of this manner of think- 
ing; for instance, to regard hot and cold as op- 
posites when we know scientifically that the only 
difference is a difference in degree of temperature. 
Not only do we find this antithetic scheme of ap- 
perception very frequently among children hut we 
also find it in the beginnings of philosophical 
science. The early days of Greek philosophy are 
dominated by this idea of opposites. Even to-day 
almost every amateur philosopher tries to measure 
values by means of opposites. Some of them have 
even established tables — ^life-death, above-below, 
and finally, man-woman. There is a significant 
similarity between the present childish and the old 
philosophic scheme of apperception, and we may as- 
sume that those people who are accustomed to 
divide the world into sharp contrasts have retained 
their childish way of thinking. 

People who live according to such an antithetic 
device have a formula which can be expressed by 
the maxim “all or nothing.” Of course it is impos- 
sible to realize such an ideal in this world, but none- 
theless they regulate their lives according to it. It 
is impossible for human beings to have either all or 
nothing. There are a thousand and one gradations 
U5 


 
between these tw^o extremes. Tliis formula is to be 
found principally among those children w4o have a 
deep feeling of inferiority and who become inordi- 
nately ambitious as a compensation. There are 
several such characters to be found in history, for 
example, Caesar, who was murdered by his friends 
when he sought for the crovm. Many of the pecu- 
liarities and character traits of children can be 
traced to this idea of all or nothing — for example, 
stubbornness. There are so many proofs of this to 
be found in the lives of children that we have been 
led to conclude that such children have developed 
a private philosophy, or a private intelligence con- 
trary to common sense. As an illustration we may 
cite the case of a four-year-old girl who was un- 
usually stubborn and perverse. One day her 
mother brought her an orange and the child took 
it, threw it on the floor and said : ‘T don’t want it 
when you bring it; I’ll have it when I feel like hav- 
ing it I” 

Indolent children who 0amiot have everything 
withdraw more and more into the emptiness of 
their daydreams, fantasies and castles-in-the-air. 
It must not be too quickly assumed, however, that 
such children are lost. We know very well that 
hypersensitive natures easily mthdraw’' from 


 
reality since their personally created world of fan- 
tasy promises them a certain protection from 
further wounding. But this withdrawal does not 
necessarily bespeak compiete maladjustment or 
unadaptability. A certain distance from reality is 
necessary not only for writers and artists but even 
for scientists, who also need a good imagination. 
The fantasies evoked in daydreams are nothing 
more nor less than a detour which an individual at- 
tempts to take to avoid the tmpleasantnesses and 
possible failures in life. We must not forget that 
just those people who had rich imaginations and 
who were later able to combine their fantasies with 
reality became the leaders of mankind. They be- 
came leaders not only because of a better school- 
ing, keener observation, but also because of their 
courage and the consciousness with which they ap- 
proached the difficulties of life and successfully 
fought them. The biographies of great men often 
reveal that while they did not have much use for 
reality and were bad students as children, they did 
develop a remarkable ability to observe what went 
on around them; so that as soon as conditions be- 
came more favorable their courage grew to the 
point w^here they once more approached reality 
and took up the fight. Naturally, there is no rule 



THE EDUCATION 0¥ CHILDREN 
as to how to make great men out of children. How- 
ever, it is well to remember that we must never ap- 
proach children brusquely, we must always en- 
courage them, always try to explain to them the 
sigmficance of real life so that they do not create a 
chasm between their fantasies and the world. 




CHAPTER NINE 


THE NEW SITUATION AS A TEST OF 
PREPAEATION 

N ot only is psychic life a unity, in the sense 
that all expressions of personality at any 
one time hang together, but it is also a continuity. 
The unfolding of personality in time takes place 
without sudden jumps. Present and future conduct 
is always consistent with past character. This is not 
to say that the events in an individual’s life are me- 
chanically determined by the past and by heredity, 
but it does mean that the future and past hang to- 
gether without a break. We cannot jump out of 
our skins overnight, although we never know what 
is in our skins — ^that is to say we never know our 
full capabilities, until the moment that we express 
them. 

In this fact of continuity without mechanical de- 
terminism, lies not merely the possibility of educa- 
tion and improvement, hut also the possibility of 
detecting the state of character development at 
U9 


 
any given time. When an individual passes into a 
new situation, his hidden character traits come out. 
If we could directly experiment with individualss 
we could find out their state of development by 
putting them through new and unexpected situa- 
tions. Their conduct in such situations must be con- 
sistent with their past character, and it reveals 
their character in a way that ordinary situations 
do not. 

In the case of children we get perhaps the best 
insights into their character at those moments of 
transitioHj when they pass from home to school, or 
when their home conditions are suddenly changed. 
It is then that the limitations in the child's charac- 
ter come out as clearly as an image on a photo- 
graphic plate when it is put in a developing solu- 
tion. 

We had occasion once to observe an adopted 
child. He was incorrigible, had temper tantrums, 
and one could never tell what he was going to do 
next. When we spoke with the child he did not 
answer intelligently. He talked about things that 
had no connection with our questions. After we 
had considered the whole situation we thought; 
This child has been in the home of his foster par- 
ents for some months and maintains a hostile atti- 


 
tilde toward them. Consequently he doesn't like it 
there. 

It was the only conclusion that one could draw 
from the situation. His foster parents shook their 
heads at first and said that the child was well 
treateds in fact better than he had ever been treated 
before in his life. But that is not decisive. We often 
hear parents say; “We have tried everything with 
the childs gentleness and severity, and nothing has 
helped.'’ Kindness by itself is not enough. There 
are children who react favorably to kindness, but 
we must not imagine that we have changed them. 
They believe that they are for a time in a favorable 
position, but basically they have remained the same 
and the disappearance of the kindness would at 
once bring back the old condition. 

What is necessary is an understanding of how 
this child feels and thinks — ^how he interprets his 
situation — and not what his parents think. We 
pointed out to the foster parents that this child did 
not feel happy with them. We could not tell them 
whether or not he was justified in his attitude, but 
something must have happened to arouse such hate 
in the child. We told them that if they did not 
feel capable of correcting the child’s mistakes and 
winning bis love, they would have to give him away 


 
to some one else, because be would always rebel 
against wbat be considered an imprisonment. La- 
ter we heard that the boy had become a veri- 
table fury, and he was considered actually danger- 
ous. The child might have been slightly improved 
by gentle treatment but that would not have been 
enough because he did not understand the whole 
scheme which became clear to us as we elicited 
further information. The real explanation of the 
case follows: He grew up with the children of his 
foster parents and believed that they did not care 
for him as much as they did for their own children. 
That is certainly no reason for such temper tan- 
trums, hut the child wanted to get out of the house 
and consequently every act which would further 
his desire seemed to him suitable. He acted intelli- 
gently in the light of the goal he had placed for 
himself and we can disregard any consideration of 
possible feeble-mindedness. It took the family 
some time to realize that they would have to give 
him away if they felt incapable of changing his be- 
havior. 

When one punishes such a child for his lapses, 
the punishment is for him a good reason for con- 
tinuing his rebellion. It is a confirmation of his 
feeling that he is right in rebelling. We have a 



 
sound basis for our views, and from this point it 
can be seen that all the child’s errors are to be 
understood only as the results of a fight against 
the environment, the results of his meeting a new 
situation for which he • had not been prepared. 
Childish as these mistakes are they need not sur- 
prise us, since we see the same childish manifesta” 
tions in adult life. 

The interpretation of gestures and unostenta- 
tious forms of expression is an almost unexplored 
field. Probably no one is in so good a position as 
the teacher to arrange all these forms into a 
scheme and to examine their connection with each 
other and their origin. It must be remembered that 
one form of expression may on different occasions 
have different meanings; that two children can do 
the same thing without having it mean the same. 
Furthermore the forms of expression in problem 
children are varied even when they arise from the 
same psychological cause. It is simply that there is 
more than one road to a certain goal. 

We cannot speak here of right or ’^vrong from 
the point of view of common sense. When children 
make a mistake it is because they have a mistaken 
goal. Consequently what proceeds as the result of 
a striving to this mistaken goal is also mistaken. It 


 
is a peculiarity in the nature of mankind that the 
possibilities for making mistakes are innumerable 
but that it has only one truth at its disposal. 

There are several forms of expression to which 
no attention is paid at school but which are of sig- 
nificance. For example, there is the position in 
sleep. An interesting case is that of a fifteen-year- 
old boy who suffered from the hallucination that 
the then Emperor Francis Joseph I had died and 
had appeared to him as a ghost, ordering him to 
organize an army and proceed against Russia. 
When we came to his room at night to see how he 
slept we saw a striking picture. He was lying in 
bed in the position of Napoleon. When we saw him 
the next day his posture was similar to the military 
pose expressed in his sleeping position. The con- 
nection between the hallucination and his waking 
attitude seemed rather clear. We inveigled him 
into a conversation in which we tried to convince 
him that the Emperor still lived. He did not want 
to believe it. He told us that he had always been 
teased about his small stature when he waited on 
the guests in the cafe. When we asked him if he 
knew some one who had the same posture in walk- 
ing he thought a little and then said, “My teacher, 


 


Mr. Meier.” We seemed to be on the right track 
and were able to get over the difficulty by conjur- 
ing up the figure of Meier as another little Napo- 
leon. What was still more important was this item; 
The boy told us that he would like to become a 
teacher. This teacliei% Meier, was his favorite and 
he would like to imitate him- in eveiytliing. In 
short, the whole life story of this boy was summed 
up in his posture. 

A new situation is a test of a child’s prepared- 
ness. If a child has been well prepared, he meets 
new situations with confidence. If he lacks pre- 
paredness, a new situation brings a tension which 
leads to a feeling of incapacity. The feeling of in- 
capacity distorts judgment, and the reaction is un- 
true — that is to say, it does not correspond to the 
demands of the situation — ^because it is not based 
on social feeling. In other words, a child’s failure 
in school must be attributed, not only to the in- 
efficiency of the school system, but to the primary 
deficiency in the child. 

We must examine the new situation, not because 
we believe it to be the cause of deterioration in a 
child, but because we know that it shows more 


 
clearly the primary inadequate preparedness. 
Every new situation may be regarded as a test of 
preparedness. 

In this connection we may again take up for dis- 
cussion some points in the questionnaire (see Ap- 
pendix I), 

plaint? Our attention is at once called to a new 
situation. When a mother remarks that her child 
was all right till he went to school, she tells us more 
than she really understands. The school has been 
too much for the child. It is not enough when the 
mother answers, “For the last three years.” We 
must know what changes took place three years 
ago in the child’s environment or in his own phys- 
ical condition. 

The first sign of a child’s waning faith in him- 
self is frequently found in his inability to adapt 
himself to school life. The initial failure is some- 
times not taken seriously enough and it may mean 
a catastrophe for the child. We must find out how 
often a child has been spanked for receiving bad 
school marks, and what effect these marks or the 
spankings have had on his striving for superiority. 
The child may become convinced that he is inca- 
pable of accomplishment, especially if his parents 


 


are in tlie liabit of saying, “You’ll never amount 
to anything,” or “You’ll end up on the gallows.” 

Some children are spurred on by failure; others 
break down. Children who lose confidence in them- 
selves and faith in the future must be encouraged. 
They must be treated gently, patiently and tol- 
erantly. 

A brusque explanation of sex may shock a child 
into confusion. The brilliant success of a sister or 
brother may deter him from further effort. 

the child’s lack of preparedness noticeable up to 
the time of change in his situation? We get all 
kinds of answers to this question. “The child was 
disorderly,” which means that the mother used to 
do everything for him. “He was always timid,” 
which means great attachment to the family. When 
a child is described as weakly, we may assume that 
he was born with weak organs, was spoiled or pam- 
pered because of his weakness, or he may have been 
neglected on account of ugliness. This question 
also refers to a possible feeble-mindedness. The 
child may have developed very slowly so that he 
was suspected of being mentally weak. Even 
though he later grew out of this condition, he would 
still retain the feeling of having been pampered or 



 
restricted, and these feelings vt^oiild make much 
more difficult any attempt to cope with a new sit- 
uation. If we are told that the child is cov^ardiy 
and careless, we may be sure that he thereby se- 
cures the attention of another. 

The first task of a teacher is to win the child, and 
thereafter to nourish his courage. When a child is 
clumsy the teacher must find out whether he is left- 
handed. If the child is clumsy to an exaggerated 
degree the teacher should find out whether the 
child fully understands his sexual role. Boys who 
grow up in a feminine environment, who avoid the 
company of other boys, who are teased and mocked 
and often treated like girls — such boys accustom 
themselves to the part of girls, and later develop 
rather stormy internal conflicts. Ignorance of the 
organic sexual distinction between male and fe« 
male leads children to believe that it is possible to 
change their sex. But they eventually discover that 
their bodily constitution is unchangeable and try to 
compensate by developing either mental masculine 
or feminine traits, according to the sex to which 
they wish to belong. They express these tendencies 
in dress and deportment. 

Some girls develop a loathing for feminine oc- 
cupations. The chief reason is the supposed value- 


 
lessness of siicli work, which expresses indeed a 
basic failure of our civilization. The tradition still 
exists that men have privileges which are denied to 
women. Our civilization is distinctly to man's ad“ 
vantage and approves of certain rights which men 
assume for themselves. The birth of a son usually 
arouses more joy than the arrival of a daughter. 
This cannot but be a harmful influence on both son 
and daughter. The thorn of inferiority stings the 
girl very soon, while the boy is burdened with ex- 
pectations. Girls are restricted in their develop- 
ment, There are countries in which this compulsion 
is no longer so noticeable; for example, in America. 
But in social relations no balance has yet been 
achieved, even in this country. 

We are concerned here with the whole mentality 
of manliind which is mirrored in the children. The 
acceptance of the role of woman involves some 
hardship which occasionally incites revolt. This re- 
volt expresses itself frequently in imruliness, stub- 
bornness, indolence, all of which have to do with a 
striving for superiority. When such symptoms ap- 
pear, the teacher must find out whether the girl is 
dissatisfied with her sex. 

This particular dissatisfaction may grow to in- 
clude ail other fields, so that life in general becomes 


 
a burden. Occasionally we meet with the expression 
of the desire to live on another planet where man- 
kind is not bhsexual. Such erroneous thought proc- 
esses can lead to various absurdities, or to complete 
apathy, criminality and even suicide. Punishment 
and lack of affection only strengthen the feeling of 
inadequacy. 

Such unfortunate conditions can be avoided 
when the child learns in an unobtrusive fashion the 
difference between man and woman and is taught 
that each is worth as much as the other. It usually 
happens that the father seems to have a sort of 
superiority. The father appears to be the possessor, 
makes the rules, directs, explains to his wife and. 
decides. Brothers try to be superior to their sisters, 
and make them dissatisfied with their sex by scorn 
and criticism. The psychologist understands that 
such conduct on the part of brothers springs from 
their own feeling of weakness. It is quite different 
to be able to do something than only to seem to be 
able. The argument that ’^fomen have up to now 
not been able to point to great accomplishments is 
quite worthless. Women have not heretofore been 
reared to do great things. Men have put in the 
hands of women stockings to mend, and have tried 
to convince women that that was their work. This 


 
lias been partly done away with, but the way we 
prepare girls to-day does not indicate that we ex- 
pect anything extraordinary of them. 

To hinder preparation and then adversely crit- 
icize inferior accomplishment is short-sighted. It 
is not easy to improve the present situation because 
it happens that not only fathers but mothers as well 
look upon masculine privileges as justified and 
rear their children according to this idea. They 
teach their children that masculine authority is 
right and their boys demand obedience and the girls 
resign themselves to it. Children should know at as 
early an age as possible to which sex they belong, 
and also that their sex is unchangeable. Women, 
as we have said, have developed resentment against 
the masculine assumption of authority and superi- 
ority. Where this resentment is so great that it is 
expressed in a woman’s refusing to accept her sex 
and striving to be as much like a man as possible. 
Individual Psychology has called it the “masculine 
protest.” Secondary symptoms, such as deformity 
or incomplete development, often lead adults to 
doubt their sex in reference to anatomical comple- 
tion (masculine physical characteristics in girls and 
feminine in boys). These beliefs are sometimes 
deeply imbedded and related to constitutional 


 
weaknesses. A childish bodily construction, more 
noticeable in the case of a man than a woman., gives 
rise to the remark that the man has feminine char- 
acteristics. This is untrue, for such a man resembles 
much more a child. A man whose body does not de- 
velop completely feels himself painfully inferior 
because the general ideal of our civilization is that 
of man fuil-growm, whose achievements must sur- 
pass those of woman. An incomplete development 
or lack of beauty in the case of a girl also leads fre- 
quently to an aversion to the problems of life be- 
cause we overvalue beauty. 

Disposition, temperament and feelings are ter- 
tiary sexual indications. Sensitive boys are called 
feminine; poised, self-confident girls are described 
as masculine. Such traits are never innate, they 
are always acquired. These characteristics in early 
childhood are remembered later and adults refer 
to the fact that they were peculiar as children, that 
they were reserved or behaved like boys or girls, as 
the case may be. They developed according to the 
interpretation of their respective sexual roles. The 
further question, how far sexual development and 
experience has gone, means that a certain under- 
standing is expected at a certain age. I should say 
that at least ninety per cent of the children, when 


 
parents or educators finally explain sexual m.at“ 
ters to thenij liave already learned the facts long 
before^ Mo hard and fast rules concerning sexual 
explanation can be made, because one cannot pre- 
dict what a child will accept, or will credit in such 
an explanation, or in general what effect it will 
have on hini. As soon as the child asks for an ex- 
planation, it should be given after considering care- 
fully the condition of the child at the time. Pre- 
mature explanation is inadvisable, even though it 
does not always have a harmful effect. 

The question of an adopted child or a step-child 
is a difficult one. Children belonging to either of 
these classes take good treatment as a matter of 
coui’se and blame all severity on their special fam- 
ily position. Sometimes a child who has lost his 
mother attaches himself closely to his father. After 
a while the father marries and the child feels that 
he has been shut out and refuses to make friends 
with the stepmother. It is interesting to note that 
a few children regard, their real parents as step- 
parents, which implies, of course, harsh criticism 
and complaint. Step-parents have acquired a bad 
reputation on account of the many fairy tales in 
which they are the evil characters. Fairy tales, it 
may be said in passing, are not perfect reading’ ma- 


THE EDUCATION OF CHILDEEN 
teria! for children. It is impossible to forbid them 
completely, because chiMren learn a great deal 
about human nature from them. But it would be 
worth while to have corrective coiiniients written 
to accompany certain stories and to prevent chil- 
dren from reading those tales which have in them 
cruelty or distorted fantasy. Fairy tales of strong 
men performing cruel deeds have been used occa- 
sionally to harden the child readers, to dwarf soft 
feelings — another mistaken idea springing from 
our hero worship. Boys think it unmanly to show 
sympathy. It is incomprehensible why tender emo- 
tion is scorned, since it is indubitably valuable when 
it is not misused — although any emotion can of 
course be misused. 

Illegitimate children, too, are in an extremely 
difficult situation. It goes without saying that it is 
not right that the woman and the child should bear 
the burden of illegitimacy while the man goes scot 
free. The one who pays the greatest price is, of 
course, the child. NTo matter, how one wants to help 
such children it is impossible to prevent their suf- 
fering, for their common sense soon tells them that 
all is not in order. They are scorned by their com- 
panions or else the laws of the country make living 
conditions hard, and illegitimacy is legally branded 


 
on them. Because of their sensitiveness they quarrel 
easily and develop a hostile attitude to the worlds 
for in every language there are ugly, insulting and 
painfully degrading words for such children. It is 
easily understandable why there are so many or- 
phans and illegitimate children among problem 
children and criminals. It is impossible to attribute 
these asocial tendencies in illegitimate or orphaned 
children to innate or inherited dispositions. 


CHAPTER TEN 


THE CHILD AT SCHOOL 

W HEN a child enters school he finds him- 
self, as we have said, in a situation that 
is wholly new to him. Like all new situations en- 
trance into school can be regarded as a test of pre- 
vious preparation. If the child has been properly 
trained he will pass the test in a normal manner; 
if not, the defects in his preparation will become 
clearly apparent. 

We do not often take records of a child’s psy- 
chological preparedness at the time he enters nurs- 
ery school and elementary school, but such records, 
if we had them, would shed great light on behavior 
in adult life. Such “new situation tests” would be 
infinitely more revealing than ordinary tests cf 
scholastic performance. 

What is demanded of a child when he enters 
school? School work is a task that demands co- 
operation with the teacher and with the school- 
mates, as well as an interest in the school subjects, 


 
By the child's responses to this new situation we 
can gauge his degree of co-operative ability and 
Ms sphere of interest. We can tell in what subjects 
the child is interested ; we can see whether he is in- 
terested in what another person says; we can tell 
whether he is interested in anything at all. We can 
ascertain all these facts by studying the attitude of 
the child, his posture and look, the way he listens, 
whether he approaches the teacher in a friendly 
manner, or whether he stays far away from him, 
etc. 

How these details affect one’s psychological de- 
velopment may be illustrated by the case of a cer- 
tain man, who consulted a psychologist because he 
had difficulties in his profession. Looking back into 
his childhood, the psychologist discovered that he 
had grown up in a family in which all the other 
children were girls ; also the parents died soon after 
he was born. When the time came to enter school, 
he did not know whether he should register in the 
girls’ or in the boys’ scjiool. He was persuaded by 
his sisters to enter the girls’ school, only to be dis- 
missed from there in a very short time. We can 
imagine the impression it left on the child’s mind. 

Concentration on school subjects is largely de- 
pendent upon the child’s interest in his teacher. It 
■ ■ ■ , 167 ; 


 
is part of tlie teacher’s art to keep a child attentive, 
and to find out when a child is not attentive or is 
irnahie to concentrate. There are many cliildren 
who come to school without any ability for con- 
centration. They are generally the pampered chil- 
dren, who are dazed by the presence of so many 
strange persons. If the teacher should happen to 
be a little strict, it will appear as if such children 
have no memory. But this lack of memory is not so 
simple a fact as it is generally regarded. A child 
who is reproached by the teacher with having no 
memory has a memory for other things. He is even 
able to concentrate, but only for the situation in 
which he has been pampered at home. He is atten- 
tive to his desire to be pampered, but not for school 
work. 

If such a child does not get on in school, if he has 
had reports and does not pass his examinations, it 
is useless to criticize him or reproach him. Criticism 
and reproaches will not change his style of life. On 
the contrary such things will convince him that he 
is not fit for school and will make him develop a 
pessimistic attitude. 

It is significant that pampered children, when 
they are won over by the teacher, are often very 


 
good pupils. They can work when they have a great 
advantage for themselves; unfortunately we can- 
not guarantee that they will always . be pampered at 
scliooL If the child changes schools or changes 
teacherSj or even if he does not make progress in a 
particular subject (and arithmetic is always a dan- 
gerous subject for pampered children), he will 
suddenly come to a stop. He will not be able to go 
ahead because he has been accustomed to having 
everything made easy for him. He has never been 
trained to struggle and does not know how to 
struggle. He has no patience for meeting difficul- 
ties and forging ahead by conscious efforts. 

We see, then, what is meant by sound prepara- 
tion for school. In bad preparation, we can always 
see the influence of the mother. We can understand 
how she was the first to awaken the interest of the 
child, and thus had the crucial responsibility of di- 
recting that interest into healthy channels. If she 
failed in her responsibility, as she often did, the 
result was made evident in the child’s behavior at 
school. Besides the mother’s influence there is the 
whole complex of family influences — the influence 
of the father, the rivalry of the children, which ^Ye 
have analyzed in other chapters. Then, too, there 



 
are the outside influences, the bad circumstances 
and prejudices, about which we shall speak more at 
length in a succeeding chapter. 

In short, with all these circmnstances that ac- 
count for the bad preparation of the child, it is 
foolish to judge the child on the basis of his scholas- 
tic record. Rather should we take the school re- 
ports as so many indications of the child’s present 
psychological condition. It is not the marks that he 
gets but what they indicate as to his intelligence, in- 
terest, ability at concentration, etc. Scholastic tests 
should not be interpreted differently from such 
scientific tests as intelligence tests, despite the dif- 
ference in their construction. In both cases the em- 
phasis should be on what is revealed as to the child’s 
mind, and not as to the quantity of facts that are 
written down. 

In recent years the so-called intelligence tests 
have been very much developed. They have a great 
weight with teachers, and sometimes they are 
worth while, since they reveal things not shown 
by the ordinary tests. Once in a while they prove 
the salvation of the child. Thus when a hoy has had 
bad school reports and the teacher has wanted to 
put him into a lower class, the intelligence may 
suddenly reveal a higher rating. The child, instead 


 
of being put back, is allowed to skip a grade. He 
feels successful, and thereafter acts differently. 

We do not wish to undervalue the function of 
an intelligence test and of an I.Q., but we must 
say that when a test is used neither the child nor 
the parents should know the I.Q. Neither the par- 
ents nor the child know the true value of an in- 
telligence test. They imagine that it represents a 
final and complete point of view, that it indicates 
the fate of the child, who is henceforth limited by 
it. In reality the findings revealed by intelligence 
tests are quite open to criticism if they are taken as 
absolute findings. A good rating on an intelligence 
test is no guarantee for later life, and on the other 
hand grown-up persons who are otherwise success- 
ful make low scores. 

It has been the experience of Individual Psy- 
chologists that whenever intelligence tests reveal 
a great lack of intelligence, the scores can be im- 
proved if we find the right methods. One of these 
methods is to let the child play with the particular 
intelligence test until lie finds out the right trick, 
as well as the right preparation for taking such an 
examination. In this way the child makes progress 
and increases his experience. He will make better 
scores on subsequent tests. 



 

It is a gi’eat question as to how children are in- 
fluenced by the school routine, and whether they 
are not oppressed by the heavy school curriculum. 
We do not undervalue the subjects in the school 
curriculum, and we do not believe that the nmaber 
of subjects taught should be decreased. It is of 
course important to teach subjects in a coherent 
manner so that the children see the purpose and 
practical value of their subject and do not regard 
it as purely abstract and theoretical. There is great 
discussion at the present time over the question, 
shall we teach the child to learn subjects and facts, 
or shall we educate the child’s personality. We in 
Individual Psychology believe that the two can be 
combined. 

As have said, subjects of instruction should 
he made interesting and practical. Mathematics — 
arithmetic and geometry — should be taught in con- 
nection with the style and structure of a building, 
the number of people that can live there, etc. Some 
subjects can be taught together. In some of the 
more progressive schools we have experts who 
know how to teach subjects in interrelation. They 
take a walk with the children and find out that they 
are more interested in certain subjects than in 
others. They learn to combine instruction; they 


 
learn to combine, for example, instruction about 
the plant with the history of the plant, the climate 
of the country, etc. In this way they not only stimu- 
late interest in subjects which would otherwise be 
uninteresting to the child, but they give him a co- 
ordinated and synthetic approach to things, which 
is the final aim of all education. 

There is a point that educators must not over- 
look, and this is that children at school feel them- 
selves to be in a personal competition. We can 
readily understand why this point is important. 
The ideal school class should be a unit, in which 
each of the children feels himself a part of the 
whole. The teacher should see to it that the rival- 
ries and personal ambitions are kept within bounds. 
Children do not like to see others forge ahead, and 
either do not spare themselves to overtake their 
competitors or else suffer a relapse into disappoint- 
ment and a subjective view of things. That is why 
the advice and direction of the teacher is so im- 
portant — a proper word from him will transfer the 
energies of the child from competitive to co- 
operative channels. 

In this connection the institution of modified 
schemes of self-government in classes is helpful. 
We do not have to wait until children are com- 


 
pletely ready for seif "government to institute 
scliemes of this kind. We can allow the cliildren at 
first to watch what is going on, or to act in an ad- 
visory capacity. If children are given complete 
self-government without preparation, we shall find 
that they are more severe and strict in their pun- 
ishments than are the teachers, or even that they 
use their political functions for personal advantage 
and superiority. 

As regards the progress of the children through 
school, we have to take into account both the point 
of view of the teacher and the point of view of the 
children. It is an interesting fact that children 
have very good judgment in this regard. They 
Imow who is the best in spelling, in drawing, in 
athletics. They can rate each other quite well. 
Sometimes they are not quite just to others, but 
they realize this, and try to be fair. The great dif- 
ficulty is that they minimize themselves: they be- 
lieve, “Now, I can never catch up.” This is not 
true — they can catch up. .The mistake in their 
judgment must be pointed out to them, otherwise 
it will become an idee fiase throughout life. A child 
who has such an idea will never progress but will 
always stay where he is. 

The great majority of school children are nearly 

m 


EDUCATION OE CHILDREN 


always at the same level: they are the best or the 
vforst or the average, and they stay that way. This 
state of things does not reflect so much the de- 
velopment of the brain, as it does the inertia of 
psj^chological attitudes. It is. a sign that children 
have limited themselves and cease to be optimistic 
after the first few checks. But that fact that 
changes in relative position do take place once in 
a while is important: it shows that there is no fa- 
tality that governs the intellectual status of a child. ^ ; 

Children should know of this, and be brought to | 

understand its application in their own case. ^ 

Both the teacher and the children should also get - ' 

rid of the superstition that the results accomplished . ^ ! 

by children with normal intelligence should he at- ' : 

tributed to special heredity. This is perhaps the 
greatest mistake that is ever made in regard to the . jj 

education of children — ^this belief in the inheritance i ji 

of abilities. When Individual Psychology first / 

pointed this out, people thought that it was simply 
an optimistic conjecture on our part, not a general- ; 

ization based on science. But now more and more 
psychologists and psychiatrists are coming to ac- 
cept this point of view. Heredity is too easy a 
scapegoat for parents, teachers and children. j 

Whenever there are difficulties that require effort, | 



 
they can always call upon heredity to relieve them 
of any responsibility for doing things^ But we have 
no right to escape our responsibilitiesj and we 
should always be suspicious of any points of view 
that have the effect of releasing us from responsi- 
bilities. 

No educator who believes in the educative value 
of his work, who believes in education as the train* 
ing of character, can consistently accept the doc* 
trine of heredity. We are not concerned with phys* 
ical heredity. We know that organic defects, even 
differences in organic ability are inherited. But 
where is the bridge between the functioning of or- 
gans and the ability of the mind? In Individual 
Psychology we have insisted that the mind experi- 
ences the degree of ability possessed by the organs 
and has to reckon with it. Sometimes the mind 
reckons too much with it — in that it gets frightened 
by some organic disability, and the fright lasts long 
after the organic cause is removed. 

People always like to trace things back to their 
origins and to seek the germs from which the phe- 
nomena developed. But this point of view, which 
we constantly use in evaluating the achievements 
of persons, is very misleading. The usual error in 
this mode of procedure is to neglect most of the 


 
ancestors^ forgetting that if we are to construct 
family trees there are two parents at every genera- 
tion, If we trace back five generations there are 
doubtless find a clever person to whom to attribute 
the ability of his descendant. If we go back ten 
generations, we have 4,096 ancestors, and then 
there is no question but that we will find one very 
able person in the lot, if not more than one. It also 
must not be forgotten that the tradition given to a 
family by one very able person has an effect that 
resembles the working of heredity. We can thus 
understand how some families produce more able 
persons than other families. It is not inheritance, it 
is a very obvious and simple fact. Just consider 
how things used to work out in Europe when each 
child was forced to continue in the profession of 
the father. If we forget the social institutions the 
statistics of heredity can be made to look very for- 
midable. 

Next to the idea of, heredity the problem that 
causes the greatest difficulties for the child is the 
punishment for bad school reports. If a child has 
bad school reports, he will also find himself not 
very well liked by the teacher. He thus suffers in 
school, and then comes home and finds new scenes 


THE EDUCATION OF CHILDEEN 
and new reproaches from his parents. He is scolded 
by his mother and father, and very often lie is 
spanked in addition. 

School-teachers should keep in mind the after- 
math of bad report cards. Some teachers believe 
that the child will struggle harder if he lias to show 
a bad report at home. But they forget the particu- 
lar home circumstances. In some homes the child is 
brought up in a rather cruel manner, and a child 
of such a home will think twice before bringing 
back a bad report. As a result he may not come at 
all, or sometimes he may be driven to the extremes 
of despair and commit suicide from fear of his 
parents. 

Teachers are not responsible for the school sys- 
tem, but it is well that wherever possible they tem- 
per the impersonal severities of the system ivith a 
personal touch of sympathy and understanding. 
Thus a teacher could be milder with a particular 
pupil on account of his home environment, and by 
being milder could encourage him instead of driv- 
ing him to despair. There is a heavy weight on the 
mind of a child who always gets bad reports and 
who continually is told by others that he is the 
worst pupil of the school until he believes it him- 
self. If we identify ourselves with such a child we 


 
can readity understand why he does not like scliooL 
It is only human. If any one were in a place where 
he was always criticized, had bad school reports, 
and lost the hope of ever catching up, he would not 
like the place and would try to escape from it. And 
so we should not be upset when we see such children 
staying away from school. 

But while we should not be alarmed at such an 
occurrence we should realize its significance. We 
should realize that it means a bad beginning, espe- 
cially if it happens in the period of adoIesceiice„ 
Such children are clever enough to protect them- 
selves by forging report cards, playing truant, etc. 
In this way they meet others of their own kind, 
form gangs, and start out on the road that leads 
eventually to crime. 

All this can be avoided if we accept the point of 
view of Individual Psychology that no child .should 
be thought hopeless. We must feel that a method 
can always be found to help a child. Even in the 
worst of circumstances, there is always a particular 
way of approach— but this of course needs to be 
found. 

Of the had results which follow from making 
children repeat classes, it is almost needless to 
speak. A teacher will agree that a child who repeats 


THE EDUCATION OE CHILDREN 


a class is a problem both for the school and. for the 
family. This may not happen in every case^ but the 
exceptions to the I'lile are very few. Most of those 
that repeat a class are chronic repeaters — ^tliey are 
always backward and present a problem which has 
always been evaded and never solved. 

It is a difficult question when to let children re- 
peat a class. There are teachers who manage to 
avoid the problem successfully. They use the va- 
cation periods to train the child, to search out the 
mistakes in his style of life and correct them, and 
so they are able to let him go on into the next class. 
This method could be practiced more widely if we 
had the institution of special tutors at school. W”e 
have social workers and visiting teachers, but no 
tutors. 

The institution of visiting teachers does not ex» 
ist in Germany, and it would seem to us as if such 
teachers are not altogether necessary. The class 
teacher in the public school has the best view in re- 
gard to the child. He can kpow more than others 
what is going on if he looks rightly. There are some 
that say that the class teacher cannot know the in- 
dividual pupils because the class is overcrowded. 
But if one observes how a child enters a school, one 
can see his style of life very soon and avoid many 


 
difficulties. This can be done even with a great 
crowd. One can educate a great number of clilMren 
better if one understands them than if one does not 
understand them. Overcrowded classes are far 
from a blessing and should be avoided, but they are 
not an insuperable obstacle. 

From the psychological point of view it is better 
that teachers do not change each year — or every 
six months as they do in some schools — ^but ad- 
vance with the class. If a teacher could be with the 
same children for two, three or four years, it would 
be a great advantage all around. Then the teacher 
would have an opportunity for knowing all the 
children intimately. He would be able to know the 
mistakes in each one’s style of life and correct 
them. 

Children often skip classes. Whether there is any 
advantage in this is debatable. Often they fail to 
satisfy the high expectations that have been awak- 
ened in them by the skipping process. Skipping a 
class should be considered in the case of a child who 
is too old for his grade. It should also be considered 
in the case of a child who was backward before and 
has since developed and improved. Skipping a 
class should not be held out as reward for better 
marks or because the child knows more than others. 



THE EBUCATION OF CHILDREN 
It is more to the advantage of a bright child if he 
devoted time to extra-school studies, like painting, 
music, etc. What the bright child learns in this way, 
is of advantage to the whole class, since it stiniu- 
lates the others. It is not good to deprive a class of 
the better pux)ils. There are those who say that we 
ahvays ought to promote the outstanding and 
bright children. We do not believe it. IVe believe 
rather that it is the bright children that push the 
whole class forward and give it a greater impetus 
for development. 

It is interesting to examine the two types of 
classes we find at school — ^the advanced and the 
backward classes. One is am^-zed to find in the ad- 
vanced classes a few children who are really feeble- 
minded, while the backward classes are peopled not 
with feeble-minded, as most persons think, but with 
children of poor families. Children of poor fam- 
ilies get the reputation of being backward. The 
reason is that their preparation is not so good. And 
we can readily understand this. The parents have 
too much to do and are not able to devote any time 
to the children, or perhaps are not well enough 
educated for this purpose. Such children who lack 
psychological preparation should not be put into 
the backward classes. Being in a backward class is 


 
a stigma for a cliild^ and the child is always ridi- 
culed b}/ liis comrades. 

A better way to take care of such children would 
be to apply the method of tutors, which we have al- 
ready mentioned. Besides tutors, there should be 
clubs, where children could go and get extra tutor- 
ing. There they could do their home work, play 
games, read books, etc. In this way .they would get 
a training in courage instead of a training in dis- 
couragement which is what they derive from classes 
for backward children. Such clubs, when combined 
with a greater abundance of pla5^grounds than we 
now have, would keep the children completely off 
the streets and away from bad influences. 

The question of co-education comes up in all dis- 
cussions of educational practice. As regards co- 
education, one may say that in principle we should 
promote it. It is a good way for girls and boys to 
get to know each other better. But, when one says 
co-education, and expects it to take care of itself, 
it is a great mistake. Co-education involves special 
problems that must be considered, or else the dis- 
advantages will overbalance the advantages. There 
is one fact, for example, that people generally 
overlook, and this is that girls up to their sixteenth 
yea,r develop more quickly than boys. If the boys 


 
do not realize this and see the girls get ahead faster 
than they do, they lose their balance and enter into 
a senseless race with the girls. Facts like these must 
be taken into consideration either by the adminis- 
tration or by the teacher in the class. 

Co-education can be successfully achieved by a 
teacher who likes co-education and understands the 
problems involved. But a teacher who does not like 
co-education will feel burdened by the system, and 
in his class co-education will fail. 

If the co-educational system is not properly ad- 
ministered and if the children are not rightly led 
and supervised, there will, of course, arise sex 
problems. We shall discuss sex problems more at 
length in a succeeding chapter. Here it may be 
pointed out that sex education in school presents a 
complicated problem. In fact the school is not the 
right place for imparting instruction about sex 
problems, because the teacher cannot know how 
the children will take his words when he speaks be- 
fore a whole class. It is different if the children ask 
for information privately from the teacher. If a 
girl asks the teacher for facts, the teacher should 
answer rightly. 

Returning now, after our digression on the more 
or less administrative phases of education, to the 


 
main heart of the problems we may say that we can 
always find out lio¥/ to educate children by con- 
sulting tlieir interests and finding out the subjects 
ill which they can be successful. Nothing succeeds 
like success. This is true of education as of other 
phases of human life. And it means that if a child 
is interested in one subject and is successful in it 
lie will be stimulated to go on to other things. It is 
up to the teacher to utilize the pupils’ successes as 
stepping-stones to greater knowledge. The pupil 
alone does not know how to do this — ^to lift him- 
self by his bootstraps, so to speak, as all of us must 
do in ascending from ignorance to knowledge. But 
the teacher can do this, and if he does it he will 
find that the pupil will see the point and will co- 
operate. 

What we have said about subjects of interest ap- 
plies also to the sense organs of children. We must 
find out which sense organ is the most used and 
what type of sensations fascinate the child most. 
There are many children who are better trained in 
seeing and looking, others in listening, still others 
in moving, etc. In recent j^ears the so-called manual 
schools have come into favor, and they utilize the 
sound principle of combining subjects of instruc- 
tion with the training of the eyes, ears and hands. 




 
The success of these schools is an indication of the 
importance of harnessing the physical interests of 
the child. 

If a teacher finds a child of the visual type^ lie 
should understand that he will have things easier 
in subjects in which he has to use Ills eyes — as for 
example geography. It will be better for him. to see 
than to listen to a lecture. This is a sample of the 
sort of insight into the problems of a particular 
child that a teacher should have. There are many 
other such insights which the teacher can get in his 
first look at the child. 

In short the ideal teacher has a sacred and fasci- 
nating task. He moulds the minds of children, and- 
the future of mankind is in his hands. 

But how shall we pass from the ideal to the ac- 
tual? It is not enough to envisage educational 
ideals. We must find a method to advance their 
realization. Long ago, in Vienna, the present 
writer started out to find such a method, and the 
result was the establishment of advisory clinics or 
guidance clinics in the schools.^' 

* See “Guiding the Child,” by Alfred Adler and Associates, Green- 
berg: Publisher, New York, -which gives a detailed account of the his- 
tory, technique and results of these clinics. 



 

The purpose of these clinics is to put the knowl- 
edge of modern psychology at the service of the 
educational sj^stem. A competent psychologist who 
understands not only psychology, but the life of 
the teachers and parents as well, joins with the 
teachers and holds a consultation clinic on a cer- 
tain day. On that day the teachers will have a meet- 
ing, and each one will bring up his particular cases 
of problem children. They will be cases of lazy 
children, children who corrupt the class, children 
who steal, etc. The teacher describes his particular 
cases, and then the psychologist will contribute his 
own experiences. Then the discussion starts. What 
are the causes? When did the situation develop? 
What should be done? The family life of the child 
and his whole psychological development is an- 
alyzed. With their combined knowledge, the group 
comes to a decision as to what should be done with 
a particular child. 

At the next session the child and the mother are 
both present. The mother will be called in first, 
after the manner of influencing her has been set- 
tled. The mother listens to the explanation of why 
the child has failed. Then the mother tells her side 
of the story, and a discussion starts between the 
mother and the psychologist. Generally the mother 
■ ■ ■ : ist : V 


 
is .quite happy to see all these signs of interest in 
her child’s case, and is glad to co-operate. If the 
mother is unfriendly and antagonistic, then the 
teacher or the psychologist begins to speak about 
similar eases and other mothers until the resistance 
is overcome. 

When, finally, the method of influencing the 
child is agreed upon, the child enters the room. He 
sees the teacher and the psychologist, and the psy^ 
chologist talks to him but not about his mistakes. 
The psychologist speaks as in a lecture, analyzing 
objectively — ^but in a manner that the child can 
grasp — the problems and the reasons and the ideas 
that are responsible for the failure to develop 
properly. The child is shown why he felt himself 
curtailed and other children preferred, how he 
came to despair of success, etc. 

This method has been followed for nearly fifteen 
years, and the teachers that have been trained in 
this work are quite happy and would not think of 
dropping the work that they have been carrying on 
for four, six and eight years. 

As for the children, they have gained doubly 
from this work: Those that were originally prob- 
lem children have been made whole — they have 
learned the spirit of co-operation and courage. The 



 
others^ too, who have not been called into the con- 
sultation clinics, have also benefited. When a sit- 
uation arises in the class that threatens to become 
a problem, the teacher will propose that the chil- 
dren talk the matter out. The teacher, of course, 
directs the discussion, but the children participate 
and have full opportunity for expression. They 
begin to analyze the causes of a problem — say, 
laziness in the class. In the end they will reach some 
conclusion, and the lazy child, who does not know 
that he is meant will, nevertheless, learn a great 
deal from the discussion. 

This summary account will give an indication of 
the possibilities that can be realized from the fusion 
of psychology and education. Psychology and edu- 
cation are two phases of the same reality and the 
same problem. To direct the mind we need to know 
its workings, and he who knows the mind and its 
workings cannot help but use his knowledge for di- 
recting the mind to higher and more universal 
goals. 


CHAPTER ELETEN 


INFLUENCES FROM OUTSIDE 

T he psychological and educational outlook 
of Individual Psychology is broad enough 
not to neglect the consideration of “influences from 
outside.” The old type of introspective psychology 
was so narrow that, in order to take care of the fact 
it had left out, Wundt found it necessary to invent 
a new science, Social Psychology. This is not nee- 
essary with Individual Psychology, which is at one 
and the same time individual and social. It does not 
concentrate upon the individual mind to the exclu- 
sion of the environment which stimulates the mind, 
nor upon the environment to the exclusion of its 
significance to particular minds. 

No educator or teacher ^should believe that he 
is the only educator of a child. The waves of out- 
side influence stream into the psyches of the chil- 
dren and mould the children directly or indirectly 
— that is to say, by influencing the parents and 
bringing them to a certain state of mind which is 


THE EDUCATION OE CHILDREN 
transferred to the children. All this cannot he 
aYoided, and it must therefore be taken into aC“ 
count. 

First of all the educator must take into account 
economic circumstances. We must remember j for 
examples that there are families living for genera- 
tion upon generation under very pressing circum- 
stances — families that cany on their struggle with 
a sense of bitterness and sorrow. They are so much 
affected by this sorrow and bitterness that they 
cannot educate the child to take a healthy and co- 
operative attitude. They are living on the limits of 
the human mind, where human beings cannot work 
along co-operative lines because they are always 
panic-stricken. 

And then, too, we must not forget that a long 
period of semi-starvation or bad economic circum- 
stances influences the physical life of both parents 
and children, and this in turn has an important 
psychological impact. We see this in the children 
born in postwar Europe. They are much more dif- 
ficult to bring up than previous generations. 
Besides economic circumstances and their effect on 
child development, we must not forget the effect 
of parental ignorance of physical hygiene. This 
ignorance goes hand in hand with the timid and 


 
coddling attitude of parents. Parents want to pam- 
per the children and are afraid to cause them any 
pain. Sometimes they are careless, and they im- 
agine, for example, that a curvature of the spine 
would be outgrown. They do not call for the doc- 
tor at the right time. This is, of course, a mistake, 
especially in cities where medical service is always 
available. A bad physical condition if not cor- 
rected in time may lead to a severe and dangerous 
illness, which may leave bad psychological scars. 
All illness is always a “dangerous corner” psycho- 
logically, and is to be avoided as much as possible. 

If these dangerous corners cannot be avoided 
they can be made much less dangerous by develop- 
ing in children the attitude of courage and social- 
mindedness. In fact it may be said that a child is 
psychologically affected by illness only in so far as 
he is not social-minded. A child that is brought up 
in an environment in which he feels himself a part 
of the whole will not be affected by a dangerous 
illness as would a pampered child. 

Case histories often show the beginning of psy- 
chological troubles after such diseases as whoop- 
ing cough, encephalitis, chorea, etc. One imagines 
that it is these illnesses which are the causes of 
psychological difficulties. But they are really only 


 
the occasions that bring out the hidden character 
flaws in the child. During his illness the child feels 
his powers, and discovers how he can rule the fam- 
ify. He lias seen terror and anxietj’^ on the parents’ 
faces during the illness, and knows that it is all 
on his account. After the illness lie wants to con- 
tiiiiie to be the center of attention, and does this 
by trying to dominate the parents with his whims 
and demands. This, of course, happens with a child 
who has never been socially trained and needs only 
the occasion to manifest his egoistic strivings. 

On the other hand it is interesting to note that 
sometimes an illness may be the occasion of an im- 
provement in the character of the child. There is 
the case of a second child of a school-teacher. The 
teacher had been very much concerned over this 
boy, and had not known what to do with him. He 
would run away from home at times, and was al- 
ways the worst pupil in his class at school. One 
day, just as the father was about to send him away 
to a reformatory, the bpy was discovered to be suf- 
fering from tuberculosis of the hip. This is a dis- 
ease which requires the constant care of the parents 
over a long period. Wben the boy finally recovered, 
he became the best child in the family. All that the 
boy needed was the extra attention from the par- 


 
ents that was provided by the illness. The reason he 
had been disobedient before was because lie had 
always felt himself to be in the shadow of a bril- 
liant older brother. Since he could not be appre- 
ciated like his brother, he was always fighting. But 
the illness convinced him that he, too, could be ap- 
preciated by his parents in the way that his older 
brother was, and so he learned to behave well. 

As regards illness there is also to be noted that 
children’s minds are often deeply impressed with 
the memory of the illnesses they have gone through. 
Children are surprised and astonished that there 
can be such things as dangerous illness and death. 
The mark that is left on their minds comes out 
later on in life, for we find many persons who are 
interested only in sickness and death. Part of these 
persons have found the right way to harness their 
interest in sickness — ^they may be doctors or nurses. 
But many others are always trembling, and sick- 
ness becomes an obsession with them which stands 
in the way of their useful wgrk. An examination of 
the biogi’aphies of more than a hundred girls re- 
vealed that nearly fifty per cent confess that the 
gxeatest fear they have in life is the thought of 
illness and death. 

Parents should see to it that children are not too 


THE EDUCATION OF CHILDEExV 
niiicli impressed by tbeir childhood sicknesses. 
They should prepare their minds for soch facts and 
spare them sudden shocks. They should give them 
the impression that life is limited but yet long 
enough to be worth while. 

Another “dangerous comer” of childhood life is 
the meeting with strangers, acquaintances or 
friends of the family. The mistakes that are made 
in the encounters with such persons are due to the 
fact that such persons are not really interested in 
the children. They like to amuse the children or do 
things which can influence them very much in a 
short time. They praise the children very highly, 
and thus get them to be conceited. In the short time 
they are with them they manage to pamper them 
and thus to make trouble for their regular educa- 
tors. All this should be avoided. No stranger should 
interfere in the educational methods of the parents. 

Again, strangers very often misunderstand the 
sex of a child and call tlie boy “a pretty girl” or vice 
versa. This, too, should be avoided, for the reasons 
which we discuss in the chapter on adolescence. 

The general environment of the family is nat- 
urally important because it gives the children an 


 
indication of the extent to which the family takes 
part in social life. It gives them^ in other words^ 
the first impressions about co-operation. Children 
who grow up in an isolated family draw a sharp 
line between members of the family and outside 
persons. They feel as if there is a chasm separating 
the home and the outside world, which of course 
they regard in a hostile light. An isolated family 
life does not promote social relations and it in- 
clines the children to be always suspicious and 
to look out only for their own interests. In this 
way it handicaps the development of social-minded- 
ness. 

A child at the age of three should be already pre- 
pared to join with other children in games and 
should not be scared by the presence of strangers. 
Otherwise the child will later turn out to be bash- 
ful and self-conscious, and will take a hostile at- 
titude to others. Generally this trait is to be found 
among pampered children. Such children always 
want to ‘‘exclude” others. 

If a parent occupies himself early with the cor- 
rection of such traits he can be sure that the child 
will be spared a great deal of trouble later on. If a 
child has had a good up-bringing in his first three 
or four years— -if he has been trained to play with 


 
others and to join in the common spirit — ^he will be 
spared not only bashfulness and egotism, but also 
a possible neurosis and even insanity. Insanity and 
neuroses occur only in the case of persons who live 
ill an isolated manner, who are not interested in 
others, and who have not the right knack for co- 
operation. 

While we are on the subject of family environ- 
ment, we may mention the difficulties which arise 
as a result of a change of economic circumstances. 
If a family had once been rich, particularly when 
the child was very young, and then lost its money, 
there is obviously a difficult situation. Such a situa- 
tion is hardest on a pampered child, for he is not 
prepared for circumstances under which he cannot 
get as much attention as before. He misses his past 
advantages and repines over them. 

If a family suddenly becomes rich, there are 
again difficulties in the bringing up of the children. 
Here tke parents are not prepared for the proper 
use of their wealth, a^d they especially make mis- 
takes in regard to the children. They want to give 
the children a good time, they want to pamper 
them and spoil them because they feel they now 
need not stint on anything. As a result we find 
problem children very often among families that 



 
are newly rich. The son of a newly rich father is a 
notorious instance of this type of problem chiHo 

Such difficulties and even disasters can he 
avoided if the child is properly trained in Co-’ 
operation. All these situations are like open doors 
through which a child escapes the necessary traiii“ 
ing in co-operation, and we must be specially on the 
watch on that account. 

Not only are children influenced by abnormali- 
ties in material circumstances, as poverty and sud- 
den riches, hut they are also influenced by abnor- 
malities in psychological circumstances. We have 
in mind psychological prejudices which arise out 
of the family situation. These prejudices may arise 
out of personal acts, as, for example, if the father 
or mother has done something that is socially dis- 
graceful. In that case the child’s mind will be 
greatly affected. The child will face the future in 
fear and trepidation. He will want to hide himself 
from his fellows and will he afraid of being dis- 
covered to be the child of such a parent. 

The parents have a responsibility not oiily to 
provide an education in reading, writing and arith- 
metic for their child, but also to give him the proper 
psychological basis of development so that he %vill 


 


not liave to bear greater difficulties than others. 

Thus, if a father is a drunkard, or if lie is higli- 
tempered, he must remember that it all affects the 
child. If the marriage is an unhappy one, if the 
husband and wife constantly quarrel, it is the child 
who again pays. 

These childhood experiences are like living in- 
scriptions in the soul of the child, and he cannot 
forget them very easily. He can, of course, obviate 
their effects if he has been trained in co-operation. 

But the very situations which create these trials 
for the child prevent him from getting that train- 
ing from the parents. That is why there has been in 
recent years a concerted movement to organize 
child guidance clinics in the schools. If the parent, 
for one reason or another, falls down on his task, 
liis work must be taken over b}^ a psychologically- 
trained teacher, who can guide the child to a 
healthy life. 

Besides the prejudices which arise from per- 
sonal circumstances there are the prejudices due j 

to nationality, race and religion. One will always 
find that such prejudices affect not merely the child 
who is humiliated, but also the others, the aggres- 
sive ones who do the humiliating. They become ar- 
rogant and conceited ; they believe that they belong 


 
to a privileged group, and when they try to live up 
to the privilege which they have erected for them- 
selves, they end up as failures. 

The prejudices between nations and races are of 
course the basic causes of war^ — ^that great scourge 
of mankind which must be abolished if progress 
and culture are to be saved. The task for the 
teacher is to show war in its true light, and not to 
give the child an easy and cheap opportunity of ex- 
pressing liis superiority striving by playing with 
gains and swords. This is not the proper prepara- 
tion for a cultured life. There are many boys who 
join the army as a result of the military education 
of childhood; but besides those that join the army 
there are a hundred times as many who are psycho- 
logically crippled for the rest of their life by their 
childhood warrior games. They always go through 
life like warriors — ^with chips on their shoulders — 
and they never learn the art of getting along with 
their fellow men. 

Ai’ound Christmas time and other seasons for 
toys, parents should especially keep an eye on the 
type of toys and games that are put into the chil- 
dren’s hands. They should get rid of weapons and 
war games, as well as of all the books that worship 
war heroes and deeds of fighting. 




 

As regards tlie selection of proper toys, a great 
deal could be said, but the principle is that we 
should select the type of toys that will stimulate 
the child to be co-operative and constructive in liis 
occupations. One can well understand that games 
in which a child can work and build up things are 
more worth while than ready-made or finished toys, 
which require the child merely to fondle a doll or 
an imitation dog, etc. Incidentally, as regards an- 
imals, children should be instructed to regard an 
animal not as toy or a game, but as a comrade of 
human beings. He should not be afraid of animals 
nor should he boss them or be cruel to them. When- 
ever children exhibit cruelty to animals one may 
suspect in them a desire to dominate and bully per- 
sons weaker than themselves. If there are animals, 
— birds, dogs, and cats — in the house, the children 
should be taught to regard them as living beings 
who feel and have pain in a way similar to human 
beings. Proper comradeship with animals may be 
regarded as a preparatory stage for social co- 
operation with human beings. 

In the environment of children there are always 
relatives. First of all are the grandparents, and we 
have to consider their plight and situation in a dis- 



 
to a privileged group, and when they try to live up 
to the privilege which they have erected for them- 
selves, they end up as failures. 

The prejudices between nations and races are of 
course the basic causes of war — that great scourge 
of mankind which must be abolished if progTess 
and culture are to be saved. The task for the 
teacher is to show war in its true light, and not to 
give the child an easy and cheap opportunity of ex- 
pressing his superiority striving by playing with 
guns and swords. This is not the proper prepara- 
tion for a cultured life. There are many boys who 
join the army as a result of the military education 
of childhood; but besides those that join the army 
there are a hundred times as many who are psycho- 
logically crippled for the rest of their life by their 
childhood warrior games. They always go through 
life like warriors — with chips on their shoulders — 
and they never learn the art of getting along with 
their fellow men, 

Ai'ound Christmas time and other seasons for 
toys, parents should especially keep an eye on the 
type of toys and games that are put into the chil- 
dren’s hands. They should get rid of weapons and 
war games, as well as of all the books that worship 
war heroes and deeds of fighting. 



 

As regards the selection of proper toys, a great 
deal could be said, but the principle is that we 
should select the type of toys that will stimulate 
the child to be co-operative and constructive in his 
occupations. One can well understand that games 
in which a child can work and build up things are 
more worth while than ready-made or finished toys, 
which require the child merely to fondle a doll or 
an imitation dog, etc. Incidentally, as regards an- 
imals, children should be instructed to regard an 
animal not as toy or a game, but as a comrade of 
human beings. He should not be afraid of animals 
nor should he boss them or be cruel to them. When- 
ever children exhibit cruelty to animals one may 
suspect in them a desire to dominate and bully per- 
sons weaker than themselves. If there are animals, 
— birds, dogs, and cats — in the house, the children 
should be taught to regard them as living beings 
who feel and have pain in a way similar to human 
beings. Proper comradeship with animals may be 
regarded as a preparatory stage for social co- 
operation with human beings. 

In the environment of children there are always 
relatives. First of all are the grandparents, and we 
have to consider their plight and situation in a dis- 



THE EDUCATION OF CHILBEEN 
interested manner. The position of grandparents 
is sometliing of a tragedy in our culture. \YIieii 
people grow up, they should have room to expand, 
they should have more occupations and interests. 
But just the reverse happens in our society. Old 
people feel put back, so to speak, relegated to a 
comer. It is a pity because such persons could ac- 
complish much more and could be infinitely hap- 
pier if they had more of an opportunity foi’ work- 
ing and striving. One should never advise a man 
at the age of 60, 70 or even 80 to retire from his 
business. It is much easier to continue in business 
than to change one’s whole scheme of life. But ow- 
ing to our mistaken social customs we put old peo- 
ple on the shelf while they are still full of activity. 
We give them no opportunity for continued self- 
expression. As a result, what happens ? The mis- 
takes that we visit on the grandparents rebound on 
the children. The grandparents are always in the 
position of having to prove — what they should not 
have to prove — ^that they are still alive and count 
in the world. In trying to prove this they are al- 
ways interfering with the education of the grand- 
children. They pamper the children terribly. It is 
a disastrous way of attempting to prove that they 
still, know how to bring up children. 



 
We sliould avoid hurting the feelings of these 
good and kind old people. But while they should be 
given an opportunity for more activity, they should 
be taught that children should grow up as inde- 
pendent human beings and should not be the play- 
things of other persons. They should not be 
exploited according to the exigencies of family poli- 
tics. If the old people have arguments with the 
parents, let them win or lose the arguments but not 
try to put the children on their side. 

How often do we find, when we study the bio- 
graphies of psychological patients, that they were 
the favorites of their grandmothers or grand- 
fathers! We immediately understand how this con- 
tributed to their childhood difficulties. Either their 
favoritism meant pampering or it meant stirring 
up rivalries and jealousies in reference to the other 
children. Also many children say to themselves, ‘T 
was the favorite of my grandfather,” and feel hurt 
if they are not the favorite of other persons. 

Among the other relatives who play a great role 
are the “brilliant cousins.” They may be set down 
as a great nuisance. Sometimes they are not only 
brilliant but are also beautiful, and we can readily 
see what trouble it creates for a child to be re- 
minded that he has a brilliant or beautiful cousin. 




 
If he is courageous and social-minded he will un- 
derstand that to be bright means simply to train 
better, and be will look for a way of overtaking the 
brilliant cousin. But if he believes, as most often 
happens, that brilliance is a blessing from nature — 
that people are bom brilliant — ^then lie will feel 
inferior and badly treated by fate. In this way liis 
whole development will be retarded. As for beauty, 
which is to be sure a gift of nature but one that is 
constantly overvalued in our civilization, we can 
also see the mistakes in a child’s style of life which 
are likely to arise when the child smarts under the 
painful thought that he or she has a beautiful 
cousin. Even after twenty years people still feel 
keenly the childhood envy of a beautiful cousin. 

The only way to combat the ravages of this cult 
of beauty is to teach children that healtli and the 
ability to get along mth one’s fellow beings are 
more important than beauty. There is no gainsay- 
ing the fact that beauty is of value, and that it is 
more desirable to have a beautiful race of persons 
than an ugly race. But in any rational planning of 
things one value cannot be isolated from the rest 
and held up as the supreme goal. This is what hap- 
pens with beauty. That beauty is not sufficient for 
a rational and good life is evidenced by the fact 


 
that we find among criminal types some very liand- 
some boySj as well as others that are quite ugly. 
We can understand how these handsome boys may 
have become criminals. They knew they were hand- 
some and they thought everything would come 
their way. They were, therefore, not prepared 
properly for life. Later on, however, they found 
they could not solve their problems without effort, 
and so they took the road of least resistance. As the 
poet Virgil said, ^Jacilis descensus Averm /" — the 
descent to hell is easy. . . . 

A word should be said about reading matter for 
children. What kinds of books should be given to 
children? What should be done with fairy tales? 
How should a book like the Bible be read to them? 
The main point here is that we generally overlook 
the fact that a child understands things in a wholly 
different way from an adult. We also overlook the 
fact that each child grasps things along the line of 
his own particular type of interest. If he is a timid 
child he will find in the Bible and in fairy tales 
stories that approve his timidity and make him al- 
ways dread dangers. Fairy tales and Bible pas- 
sages always need to be commented upon and 
interpreted so that the child gets the meaning that 


 
is intended and not the one that his subjective 
fancy dictates. 

Fairy tales are of course enjoyable reading — 
even adults can read them with profit. But there is 
one point that needs to be corrected about them, 
and that is the sense of remoteness from particular 
times and places. Children seldom understand the 
differences of ages and the differences of cultures. 
They read a fairy tale which has been written in a 
totally different age and they do not make allow- 
ance for the difference in outlook. There is always 
the jj^’ince, and the prince is always praised and 
decorated, and his whole character is presented in 
a very alluring fashion. The circumstances de- 
scribed of course never existed, but they represent 
the fictional idealization proper to a certain period 
when it was necessary to worship the prince. Chil- 
dren should be told about such things. They should 
be told about the make-believe which is behind the 
magic; otherwise they may grow up always look- 
ing for an easy way out of ^ things, like a certain 
boy of twelve, who, when asked what he wanted to 
be, said, “I want to be a magician.” 

Fairy tales, when properly commentated, can 
be used as a vehicle for instilling in children the 
sense of co-operation as well as for enlarging their 


 
outlook. As regards motion pictures, it may be said 
that there is no danger in taking a child of a year 
to see a film, but cliildren of a later age will al- 
ways misunderstand the pictures. Even fairy tale 
plays are often misunderstood by them. Thus a 
child at the age of four saw a certain fairy tale per- 
formed in a theatre. Years later he still believed 
that there were women in the world v/lio sell poi- 
soned apples. Many children do not understand 
the theme rightly, or else they make sweeping gen- 
eralizations. It is up to the parent to explain things 
until he is sure they have imderstood rightly. 

The reading of newspapers is one outside influ- 
ence that can well be spared children. Newspapers 
are written for adults and do not have the child’s 
point of view. There are in certain places special 
children’s newspapers, and these are ail to the good. 
But as for the ordinary newspaper, it gives a dis- 
torted picture of life to the unprepared child. The 
child gets to believe that our whole life is full of 
murders, crimes and « accidents. Accident reports 
are specially depressing to young children. We can 
gather from remarks of grown up persons how 
much they were afraid of fire during childhood, 
and how this fear has continued to obsess their 
minds. 




 
These examples comprise only a small selection 
of the outside influences which the parent and edu- 
cator have to consider in . 
They are, however, the most important, and they 
illustrate the general principles involved. Again 
and again the Individual Psychologist has to in- 
sist upon the watchwords, “Social Interest” and 
“Courage.” Here, as in other problems, the same 
slogans hold good. 


CHAPTER TWEEYE 


ADOLESCENCE AND SEX EDUCATION 

W HOLE libraries have been written about 
adolescence. The topic is indeed an im- 
portant one, but not altogether in the way people 
imagine it. Adolescents are not all alike: we find 
all varieties of children in that class* — striving chil- 
dren, clumsy children, children that are neatly 
dressed, children that go around very dirty, etc. 
We also find grown up persons and even old peo- 
ple who look and act like adolescents. From the 
point of view of Individual Psychology this is not 
very surprising, and it means simply that these 
grown up persons have stopped at a certain stage 
of development. In fact adolescence is, for Individ- 
ual Psychology, simply a stage of development 
through which all individuals must pass. We do not 
believe that any stage of development, or any sit- 
uation, can change a person. But it does act as a 
test — as a new situation^ which brings out the char- 
acter traits developed in the past. 




THE EDUCATION OF CHILDEEN 

Take, for example, a cliildliood in wliicli the 
child lias been closety watched and observed, a 
cliildhoocl in which the child has not enjoyed much 
power and has not been able to express wliat lie 
wants. In the stage of adolescence, where there is 
a rapid biological and psychological development, 
such a child will act as if he has lost his chains. He 
will go ahead quickly and his personality will de- 
velop along sound lines. On the other hand there 
mil be other children who will begin to stop and 
look back, and by looking back towards the past 
they will fail to find the right way in the present. 
TIie.y are not interested in life, and become very 
reserved. It is a sign, in their case, not of energies 
held in leash in a repressed childhood and finding 
their release in adolescence, but rather of a pam- 
pered childhood which has deprived them of the 
proper preparation for life. 

In adolescence we are able to read a person’s style 
of life better than ever before. The reason is, of 
course, that adolescence is nearer the front of life 
than is childhood. We can now see better how he will 
behave towards science. We can see whether he can 
make friends easily, whether he can be a fellowman 
who is socially interested in others. 



THE EDUCATION OF CHILDEEN 

Sometimes tills social interests so far from being 
absents takes on an exaggerated expressions and we 
meet witli adolescents who have lost the sense of 
balance and want only to sacrifice their lives for 
others. They are over-ad jnsted socially, and this, 
too, may prove an obstacle to their development. 
We know that if a person really wants to be in- 
terested in others and work for the cominon cause, 
he must first take care of himself. He must have 
something to give of himself, if the giving is to mean 
anything. 

On the other side, we see many youths in the 
period between fourteen and twenty who feel alto- 
gether lost socially. At fourteen they have left school 
and have thus lost touch with all their old com- 
rades ; and it will take them a long time to form new 
ties. In the meantime they feel wholly isolated. 

Then there is the question of occupation. Here 
again adolescence is revealing. It will reveal the at- 
titude formed in the style of life. We will find some 
youths becoming very independent and working 
marvelously. They will show that they are on the 
proper road to development. Others, however, will 
come to a stop in this period. They will not find the 
right occupation for themselves; they will always be 


 
changing — either changing trades or changing 
schools, etc. Or else they will be idle and will not 
want to work at all. 

None of tliese symptoms is created in adolescence, 
blit they are merely brought more clearly to the 
surface in this period — ^they have been prepared be- 
fore, iind if a person really knows a particular child, 
he can predict how he will behave in the period of 
adolescence when he is given opportunities to ex- 
press himself more independently than in the period 
when he was watched, guarded and restricted. 

We turn to the third fundamental problem of 
life — love and marriage. What does the adolescent’s 
answer to this problem reveal about his personality? 
Again there is no break with the pre-adolescent 
period, only a heightened psychological activity 
which makes the answers more clear-cut than be- 
fore. We will find that some adolescents are wholly 
sure as to how they have to behave. They are either 
romantic on the problem of love or are very cou- 
rageous. In any case they find the right norm of be- 
havior towards the other sex. 

There is another group at the other extreme, wlio 
become terribly shy on the question of sex. Now 
that they are much nearer the front, so to speak, 
they show up their lack of preparation. The indica- 



 


tions about personality that we derive from the 
period of adolescence make possible a reliable judg- 
ment as to the course of behavior in later life. We 
Imow what must be done if we want to change the 

future. 

If an adolescent shows himself very negativistic 
in regard to the other sex, we will find, if we trace 
back his life, that he was probably a fighting child. 
Perhaps he was one that felt depressed because an- 
other child was preferred. As a result he believes 
now that he must step forward very strongly, that 
he must be arrogant and deny all the calls of senti- 
ment. His attitude to sex is thus a reflex of his child- 
hood experiences. 

In the period of adolescence we often find the de- 
sire to leave home. This may be due to the fact that 
the child has never been satisfied with home condi- 
tions, and is now aching for the first opportunity to 
break home ties. He does not want to be supported 
any more, although it is really for the best interests 
of both the child and the parent that the support be 
continued. Otherwise, in case things go wrong with 
the child, the lack of help from the parents becomes 
an alibi for his failure. 

The same tendency, expressed in a smaller de- 
gree, is found in the case of children who remain at 



 
liome, but use every possible occasion to sta}?' out at 
oiglit. It is, of course, mucli more alluring to go out 
at night and seek amusement than to stay quietly at 
home. It is also an implicit accusation against the 
home, and a sign that at home the child does not feel 
free, but is always guarded and watched. Thus lie 
has never had the occasion to express himself and to 
find out his own mistakes. The period of adolescence 
is a dangerous time to make a beginning in this direc- 
tion. 

Many children also feel a sudden loss of apprecia- 
tion more keenly in the period of adolescence than 
they would have felt before. Perhaps they had been 
good pupils at school and highly appreciated by 
their teachers; then they were suddenly transferred 
to a new school, to a new social environment or to a 
new occupation. And then, too, we know that often 
the best pupils at school do not continue to be the 
best in the period of adolescence. They seem to un- 
dergo a change, but in reality there is no change, 
only that the old situation did not show up their 
character as truly as the new situation. 

From all this, it follows that one of the best pre- 
ventives for the troubles of adolescence is the culti- 
vation of friendship. Children should be good friends 
and comrades with one another. And this goes for 


 
inenibers of the family as well as for people outside 
the family. The family should be a unit in which 
every one trusts the others. The child should trust 
his parents and his teachers. Indeed, in the period 
of adolescence only that type of parent and teacher 
can continue in his capacity of guide to the child who 
has hitherto been a comrade and sympathetic fellow- 
man to his charge. Any other kind of parent or 
teacher is immediately shut out by the child during 
tills period; the child will not repose any confidences 
in him and will regard him as a complete outsider or 
even as an enemy. 

Among girls, one will find that it is just at this 
time that they will reveal their dislike of the feminine 
role, and that they will seek to imitate boys. It is of 
course much easier to imitate boys in the adolescent 
vices — ^that is, in smoking, drinking and joining 
gangs — ^than in the virtues of hard work. Also, the 
girls have the excuse that if they did not copy such 
practices the boys would not be interested in them. 

If we analyze this masculine protest of the ado- 
lescent girl we shall find that the girl in question 
never liked the feminine role from early childhood. 
Hitherto, however, her dislike was covered up, and 
it comes out clearly only in adolescence. That is 
why it is so important to observe the behavior of 



 
girls at this time, for it is then that we can find out 
how they stand in regard to their sex role of the fu- 
ture. 

Boys at this age often like to play the role of a 
man who is very wise, very brave and self-confident. 
Another class is afraid of their problems, and do 
not trust themselves to be really and completely 
men. If there has been any defect in their education 
for the male role this is the time it will come out. 
They will show themselves effeminate, they will like 
to behave like girls, and they will even imitate the 
vices of girls — ^being coquettish, liking to pose, etc. 

Parallel with this feminine extreme among boys, 
we may also find boys who excel in the typically boy- 
ish traits, which may be carried to the extreme of 
vice. They will excel in drinking and in sexual ex- 
cesses. Sometimes they will even begin to commit 
crimes merely out of a desire to show off their manli- 
ness. Such vices are found among boys who want to 
be superior, who want to be leaders and who want 
to astonish their comrades. , 

In this type, however, despite the bravado and 
ambition, there is often a secret trait of cowardice. 
We have had recently some notorious examples of 
this in America — ^types like Hickman, Leopold and 
Loeb. If we examine such careers we shall find that 



 

they were prepared for an easy life and were always 
looking for easy successes. Such types are active but 
not courageous— just the right combination for 
criminality. 

We often find children at the adolescent age strik- 
ing their parents for the first time. One who does 
not look for the hidden unity behind their actions 
will imagine that these children have suddenly 
changed. But, if we study what happened before, 
we realize that the individual is quite the same in 
character, only that he now has more power and 
more possibilities for action. 

Another point to he considered is that in the period 
of adolescence every child feels that he is con- 
fronted with a test — ^he feels that he must prove that 
he is no longer a child. This is of course a very 
treacherous feeling, for every time we feel that we 
must prove something, we are likely to go too far. 
And so the child also goes too far. 

This is indeed the most significant symptom of 
adolescence. And the way to counteract it is by ex- 
plaining to the youth that he does not have to con- 
vince us that he is no longer a child; we do not need 
the proof .By telling him this we may avoid the exag- 
gerated features we have mentioned. 

Among girls we often find a type that is inclined 


THE EDUCATION OP CHILDREN 
to exaggerate sex relations and become “boy-crazy.” 
These girls are always fighting with their mothers 
and always believe themselves to be suppressed (and 
perhaps they are really suppressed) ; they will have 
relations with any man they meet in order to spite 
the mother. They are quite happy in the knowledge 
that the mother will be pained if she should find out. 
Many an adolescent girl has had first sex relations 
with a man after running out of the house on account 
of a quarrel with the mother, or because the father 
was too severe. 

It is ironical to think of girls being suppressed by 
tbeir parents in order that they may be good girls, 
and then turning out bad because of the parents’ 
lack of psychological insight. The fault in such cases 
does not lie with the girls but with the parents, be- 
cause they have not properly prepared the girls for 
the situations they must meet. They have sheltered 
the girls too much before adolescence, and as a re- 
sult they have failed to develop in them the judg- 
ment and self-reliance necqssary for meeting the 
pitfalls of adolescence. 

Sometimes the difficulties appear not in adoles- 
cence but after adolescence, in marriage. The prin- 
ciple is, however, the same. It is simply that the girls 
were fortunate enough not to meet an unfavorable 


 
situation in adolescence. But sooner or later an un- 
favorable situation is bound to occur, and it is neces- 
sary to be prepared for it. 

A single case history may be cited here to illus» 
trate concretely the problem of the adolescent girl. 
The girl in this case was fifteen years old and came 
from, a very poor family. Unfortunately she had an 
older brother who was always sick and had to be 
nursed by the mother. The girl noticed the differ- 
ence in attention from her early childhood. What 
complicated matters was the fact that when she was 
born the father was also sick, and the mother had to 
take care of both him and the brother. The girl had 
a double example of what it means to he nursed and 
to get attention, and it became her passionate long- 
ing to he cared for and to be appreciated by people. 
She could not find this appreciation in the family 
circle, especially as a younger sister was soon horn 
into the family and deprived her of the little modi- 
cum of attention that she still had. ISTow as fate 
would have it, when the younger sister was born the 
father got well, so that the baby got more attention 
than she herself had received during her infancy. 
Children notice these things. 

The girl made up for her lack of attention at home 
by striving hard at school. She made herself the best 


THE EDUCATION OF CHILDKEN 
pupil in her class, and because she was such a good 
pupil it was proposed that she continue her studies 
and go through high school. But as she entered high 
school a change took place. Her studies were not so 
good, and the reason was that her new teacher did 
not know her and did not appreciate her. She, on her 
side, was eager for appreciation, but now she lacked 
it both at home and at school. She had to get her ap- 
preciation somewhere. And so she went out to look 
for a man who would appreciate her. She lived with 
the man for a fortnight. Then the man got tired of 
her. We could have predicted what would happen; 
we could have predicted that she would realize that 
this is not the appreciation she wanted. In the mean- 
time the family became worried and started a search 
for her. Suddenly they received a letter from her, 
saying, ‘T have taken poison. Do not worry — ■ I am 
happy.” Suicide was obviously her next thought, 
after being defeated in her quest for happiness and 
appreciation. Nonetheless she did not commit sui- 
cide ; she used suicide as a scare with which to bring 
about forgiveness from her parents. She continued 
to run around the streets until her mother found her 
and brought her home. 

If the girl knew, as we know, that her whole life 
was dominated by the striving to be appreciated, 



 
then all these things would not have happened. Also 
if the teacher at the high school had realized that the 
girl had always been good in her studies and that all 
she needed was a certain measure of appreciation^ 
the tragedy would again not have taken place. At 
any point in the chain of circumstances a proper 
handling of the girl could have prevented her going 
to ruin. 

This brings up the matter of sex education. The 
subject of sex education has been frightfully exag- 
gerated in recent times. There are many persons 
who are, if we may say so, insane on the subject of 
sex education. They want sex education at any and 
all ages, and they play up the dangers of sexual 
ignorance. But if we look into our own past and 
into the past of others we do not see such great dif- 
ficulties nor such great dangers as they imagine. 

What the experience of Individual Psychology 
teaches is that a child should be told at the age of two 
that he is a boy or a girl. It should also be explained 
to him at that time that his sex can never be changed, 
and that boys grow up to be men and girls grow up 
to be women. If this is done, then the lack of other 
knowledge is not so dangerous. If it is brought home 
to him that a girl will not be educated like a boy nor 
a boy like a girl, then the sex role will be fixed in 



 
his mind and lie will be sure to develop and to pre- 
pare for Ms role in a normal manner. If he believes^ 
however, that through a certain trick lie can change 
Ills sex, then trouble will result. Trouble will also 
result if the parents are always expressing a desire 
to change the sex of a child. In The JV ell of Lone- 
liness we find an excellent literary presentation of 
this situation. Parents too often like to educate a 
girl like a hoy or vice versa. They will photograph 
their children dressed in the clothes of the opposite 
sex. It sometimes happens, too, that a girl looks 
like a boy, and then people in the environment begin 
calling the child by its wrong sex. This may start a 
great confusion, which can very well be avoided. 

There should also be avoided any discussion about 
the sexes which tends to undervalue the female sex, 
and to regard hoys as superior. Children should be 
made to understand that both sexes are of equal 
worth. This is important not merely in order to pre- 
vent an inferiority complex on the part of the mem- 
bers of the undervalued sex,' but also to prevent a 
bad effect upon the children of the male sex. If 
boys were not taught to think that they are the supe- 
rior sex, they would not look upon girls as mere ob- 
jects of desire. Nor would they look upon the rela- 


 
tioas of the sexes 121 an ugly light if they knew their 
fiitare tasks, 

is not merely explaining to children the physiology 
of sexual relationships — ^it inyolves the proper prep- 
aration of the whole attitude towards love and mar- 
riage, This is closely related to the question of social 
adjustment. If a person is not socially adjusted he 
will make a joke out of the question of sex and look 
at things entirely from the point of view of self- 
indulgence. This happens of course all too often, 
and is a reflex of the defects of our culture. Women 
have to suffer because under our culture it is much 
easier for a man to play the leading role. But the 
man also suffers because by means of this fictitious 
superiority he loses touch with the underlying 
values. 

As regards the physical phase of sex education, it 
is not necessary that children receive this education 
very early in life. One can wait until the child be- 
comes curious, until he wants to find out certain 
things. A mother and father who are interested in 
the child will also know when it is proper for them 
to take the lead if the child is too shy to ask ques- 
tions. If he feels that his father and mother are com- 


 
rades he will ask questions, and then the answers 
must be given in a manner proper to his understand- 
ing. One most avoid giving answers that stimulate 
the sex drive. 

Ill this connection it may be said that one need 
not always be alarmed by apparently premature 
manifestations of the sex instinct. Sex development 
begins very early, in fact in the first weeks of life. It 
is v/holly certain that an infant experiences ero- 
genous pleasures, and that he sometimes seeks to 
stimulate the erogenous zones artificially. We should 
not be frightened if we see signs of the beginnings 
of certain nuisances, but we should do our best to put 
a stop to these practices without seeming to attach 
too much importance to them. If a child finds out 
that we are worried over these matters he will con- 
tinue his habits deliberately in order to gain atten- 
tion. It is such actions that make us think he is a 
victim of the sex drive, when he is really exploiting 
a habit as a tool for showing off. Generally little 
children try to gain attention- by playing with their 
genital organs because they know that their parents 
are afraid of this practice. It is much the same psy- 
chology as when children play sick because they have 
noticed that when they are sick they are more pam- 
pered and more appreciated. 




THE EDUCATION OF CHILDEEN 

Children should not be stimulated bodily by too 
. much kissing and embracing. It is cruel to the child, 
especially in the adolescent period. Nor should chil- 
dren be stimulated mentally on the subject of sex. 
It happens very often that a child will discover some 
frivolous pictures in the father’s library. We hear 
constantly of such cases in the psychological clinics. 
The children should not be able to put their hands 
on books which deal with sexual matters on a plane 
above their age. Nor should they be taken to see 
moving picture shows in which the sex theme is ex- 
ploited. 

If one avoids all such forms of premature stimula- 
tion, one need not have any fears. One needs only 
to speak at the right time in a few simple words, 
never irritating the child and always giving answers 
in a true and simple manner. Above all one must 
never lie to the child, if one wants to retain his trust. 
If the child trusts the parent he will discount the ex- 
planations that he hears from his comrades — ^per- 
haps ninety per cent»of mankind get their sexual 
knowledge from comrades — and will believe what 
the parent says. Such co-operation, such camaraderie 
is much more important than the various subter- 
fuges that are used in the belief that they answer 
the situation. 




THE EDUCATION OF CHILDEEN 

Cliildren who experience too miicli of sex, or ex- 
perience sex too early in life, general!}^ shrink from 
sex later on. That is why it is a good thing to avoid 
having the children notice the love-making of par- 
ents. If possible they should not sleep in the same 
room — and certainly not in the same bed — with the 
parents. Also, sisters, and brothers should not sleep 
in the same room. The parents must keep an eye 
open to see that the children behave rightly, and 
they should also be on the watch for outside in- 
fluences. 

These remarks sum up the most important items 
in the matter of sex education. We see here, as in 
all other phases of education, the dominant impor- 
tance of the sense of co-operation and friendliness 
within the family. With this co-operation present, 
and with an early knowledge of the sex role and of 
the equality of man and woman, the child is well 
prepared against any dangers that he may meet. 
And above ail, he is well prepared for carrying on 
his work in a healthy manner.' 



CHAPTER THIRTEEN 


PEDAGOGICAL. MISTAJ^ES 

I N tile rearing of children there are some things 
which the parent or teacher must never allow 
to discourage him. He must never grow hopeless be- 
cause his efforts do not meet with immediate suc- 
cess ; he must not anticipate defeat because the child 
is lethargic or apathetic or extremely passive; nor 
must he permit himself to he influenced by the super- 
stition that there are gifted or ungifted children. In- 
dividual Psychology claims that the effort should be 
made with all children to stimulate their mental 
faculties by giving them more courage, more faith 
in themselves ; by teaching them that difficulties are 
not to be regarded as insurmountable obstacles, but 
as problems to meet and conquer. Success will not 
always attend such efforts, but the many cases which 
are successful more than compensate for those which 
do not produce spectacular results. The following is 
an interesting case in which our efforts were suc- 
cessful; 





 

TMs was the case of a tYvelve-year-old boy in liis 
sixth year at elementary school. He had bad marks 
and was not in the least disturbed by them. He had 
an unusually infelicitous past history. He could not 
walk until he was about three years old on account 
of ridcets. At the end of his third year he was able 
to speak only a few wmrds. When he was four^ liis 
mother took him to a child psychologist who told 
her that the case was hopeless. The mother, however, 
did not believe this, and placed the child in a child 
guidance institute. There he developed “slowly and 
without much help from the institute. When the boy 
was six it was decided that he was able to enter 
school. During the first two years at school, he re- 
ceived extra tutoring at home, so that he was able 
to pass his school examinations. He managed to get 
through the third class and through the fourth as 
well. 

The situation at school and at home was as fol- 
lows : The boy made himself noticeable at school by 
his great indolence; he complained that he did not 
seem able to concentrate and could not listen with 
attention. He did not get along well with his school- 
mates, was teased by them and always showed him- 
self weaker than the others. Among all his school- 
mates he had only one friend whom he liked very 


 
inucli and with whom he went walking. He found the 
other children disagreeable and was unable to make 
contact with them. The teacher complained that the 
boy was weak in arithmetic and that he could not 
write; this in spite of the fact that the teacher was 
convinced that the hoy was capable of accomplish- 
ing as much as the others. 

In the light of the boy’s past history and what he 
had already been able to do, it was clear that the 
treatment of the boy had been based on a mistaken 
diagnosis. Here was a child suffering from an in- 
tense feeling of inferiority — in short, an inferiority 
complex. The boy had an older brother who got 
along very well. His parents claimed that he was 
able to enter high school without ever studying. 
Parents like to say that their children do not have 
to study anything, and the children themselves then 
like to boast of it. It is evident that learning without 
some sort of studying is impossible. This older 
brother probably trained himself to do most of his 
studying in the classroom by listening intently and 
retaining what he heard and saw at school. Children 
who do not pay so much attention in school have to 
do their studying at home. 

What a difference between the two boys! Our 
child had to live constantly under the oppressive 


 
feeling that he was less capable than his brother, 
and that he was worth infinitely less than lie. He 
probably heard this often enough from Ms mother 
when she was angry with him, or from Ills brother 
who used to call him a fool or an idiot. His mother 
said that the older brother often kicked the younger 
when the latter did not obey him. We had the result 
before us ; a human being who believed that he was 
worth less than others. Life seemed to confirm his 
belief. His schoolmates laughed at him; his school 
work was always faulty; he said he could not 
concentrate. Every difficulty frightened him. His 
teacher remarked from time to time that the cMld 
did not belong in that class or in that school. It is 
no wonder that the child finally believed that it was 
impossible to avoid the situation into which he had 
fallen, and he was convinced that the opinion which 
others had of him was correct. It is pathetic when a 
child is so discouraged that he has no faith in the 
future. 

It was easy to see that this child had lost his faitM 
not because he trembled and grew pale when we be» 
gan to chat with him in a cheery fashion, but from 
a small sign which should always be noted. When 
we asked him how old he was (we knew that he was 


 


twelve) he ansv/ered; “Eleven years/* One should 
never take such an answer to be an accident since 
most children know exactly how old they are. We 
have often had occasion to ascertain that such mis- 
takes have underlying reasons. When we consider 
what has happened in the life of this childj and then 
remember his answer, we get the impression that he 
is trying to recapture his past. He wants to return 
to the past, to the time when he was smaller, weaker 
and more in need of help than he is now'. 

We can reconstruct his system from the facts al- 
ready at our disposal. This child does not seek his 
salvation in the accomplishment of those tasks usu- 
ally given to a child of his age; but he believes and 
behaves as if he were not as fully developed as others 
and could not compete with them. This state of feel- 
ing himself behind the others is expressed in the re- 
duction of his years. It is possible that he answers 
“eleven years” and behaves, under certain circum- 
stances, like a child of five. He is so convinced of his 
inferiority that he attempts to adjust all his activities 
to this supposed state of being backward. 

The child still wet himself in the daytime and he 
was unable to control his bowel movements. These 
are symptoms which appear when a child believes or 


 
wants to believe tliat he is still a baby. They confirm 
our statement that this boy wanted to cling to the 
past, and to return to it if possible. 

There w'as a governess in the house who had been 
there before the child was born. She was very niucli 
attached to the child, and took the mother’s place 
whenever possible, acting as the child’s support. We 
could draw further conclusions. We already know 
how the boy lived, we know that he did not like to 
get up early in the morning. A description of how 
long it took him to arise was given us with a gesture 
of disgust. Our conclusion was that the boy did not 
like to go to school. A boy who does not get along 
with his schoolmates, who feels himself oppressed, 
who does not believe that he is capable of accom- 
plishing anything, cannot possibly want to go to 
school. As a result, he will not want to get up in time 
for school. 

His governess, however, said that he did want to 
go to school. In fact when he was sick recently he 
begged to be allowed to get jup. This does not con- 
tradict in the least what we said. The question to be 
answered is, “How can the governess make such a 
mistake?” The circumstances were clear and amus- 
ing. When the boy was sick, he could permit him- 
self to say that he wanted to go to school, since he 



 
knew positively that Ms governess would reply, 
“You cannot go because you are sick.” His family, 
however, did not understand the seeming contradic- 
tion, and they were confused in their attempts to do 
something with the boy. We also had frequent op- 
portunities to observe that the governess was in- 
capable of understanding wliat was actually going 
on in the boy’s mind. 

Something else had developed which was the im- 
mediate cause of bringing the hoy to us. He had 
taken money from the governess to buy candy. That 
also meant that he was behaving like a small child. 
To take money for candy is extremely childish. Very 
young children carry on in this fashion when they 
cannot control their greed for candy; they are the 
children who also cannot control their bodily func- 
tions. The psychological significance of this is : “You 
must watch me, otherwise I am capable of doing 
something naughty.” The boy tried constantly to ar- 
range situations which would make others occupy 
themselves with him because he had no confidence 
in himself. When we compared his situation at home 
and at school, the connection was clear. At home he 
could get people to occupy themselves with him; 
in school he could not. But who attempted to do 
something to correct the child’s conduct? 



THE EDUCATION OF CHILDMEN 

Up to the time the boy was broiiglit to us be was 
regarded as a backward, inferior child, and be did 
not in the least deserve this classification. He was a 
completely normal child who could accomplish as 
much as any of his schoolmates as soon as he regained 
faith in himself. He had always been inclined to view 
everything pessimistically, to accept defeat before 
he had made one step forward. His lack of self- 
confidence was expressed in every gesture and was 
confirmed in his teacher’s report : “Cannot concen- 
trate; weak memory; inattentive; has no friends; 
etc.” His discouragement was so patent that no one 
would overlook it and circumstances were so much 
against him that it would have been difiScult to 
change his point of view. 

After our Individual Psychological questionnaire 
had been filled out the consultation followed. We 
had to confer not only with the boy but with a whole 
group of persons. First, the mother, who had long 
since given him up as hopeless and only tried to keep 
him going so that he would eyentiiall}^ be able to do 
some sort of work. Second, the older brother, who 
looked upon the younger boy with contempt. 

Our boy naturally had no answer to the question, 
“'^¥hat do you want to be when you grow up?” This 
is unusually characteristic. It is always suspicious 



 
Fvlieii a lialf-grown child ideally does not know wliat 
lie wants to become. It is true that people do not 
generally land in the profession they chose as chil- 
dren, but that does not matter. They are, at least, 
led by an idea. In their earliest years children want 
to become chauffeurs, watchmen, conductors, or 
whatever positions visible to them appear attractive 
to their childish valuations. But when a child has no 
material goal in view, it is to be suspected that he 
wants to keej) his eyes awa5:^ from the future, to re- 
turn to the past; or, in other words, to avoid the 
future and all problems connected with it. 

This seems to contradict one of the basic claims of 
Individual Psychology. We have always spoken of 
the striving for superiority characteristic of chil- 
dren, and we have attempted to show that every child 
wants to unfold himself, to become bigger than the 
others, to accomplish something. Suddenly we have 
before us a child of whom the contrary can be said; 
a child who wants to go backwards, wants to be small 
and to have others support him. How are we to ex- 
plain it? Movements in mental life are not primi- 
tive. They have a complicated background. Were we 
to draw naive conclusions in complicated cases we 
would always be mistaken. There are tricks in all 
these complications, and any dialectical attempt to 


 
make the opposite out of the thing itself j aSj for 
example, to say that the hoy struggles in a Backward 
direction because he appears, in that way, the Hg» 
gest, and in the safest position, must be confusing 
unless one understands the whole picture com- 
pletely. In point of fact, these children are right in 
an amusing way. They can never be so strong or so 
dominating as during the time when they are really 
quite small, weak and helpless, and nothing is de- 
manded of them. This child, who had no confidence 
in himself, was afraid he could not accomplish any- 
thing. Are we then to assume that he will willingly 
face a future which will expect something from 
him? He must avoid every situation in which his 
strength and abilities will be used to measure him as 
an individual. NTothing remains, therefore, but a 
greatly restricted sphere of activity where little will 
be asked of him. In this way we can understand that 
only a small portion remains of his striving for 
recognition, the recognition which he received as a 
tiny child dependent upon others. 

We had to confer not only with the boy’s teacher, 
his mother and older brother, but with bis father and 
with our colleagues. Such a string of conferences en- 
tails much work, and a great deal of labor could be 
saved if we could win the teacher over. This is not 



 
impossible^ bet it is not simple. Many teachers still 
cling fast to old methods and beliefs and regard psy- 
chological examinations as something extraordinary. 
Many of them fear that a psychological examina- 
tion indicates a loss of power or else they regard it as 
an unwarranted interference. This is, of course, not 
so. Psychology is a science which cannot he learned 
all at once, but must he studied and practiced. It is, 
however, of little use when one has the wrong point 
of view. 

Tolerance is also a necessary quality, especially 
for a teacher, and it is wise to have an open mind to 
new psychological ideas, even when they seem to 
contradict the views we have held hitherto. As con- 
ditions exist to-day, we have no right to contradict 
flatly the opinion of the teacher. What are we to do 
in such a difficult situation? In our experience noth- 
ing remains to he done in such cases but to take the 
child out of his difficult predicament — that is to say, 
to remove him from that particular school. ]N o one 
is hurt by this procedure. Practically no one knows 
what is going on, but a burden falls from the shoul- 
ders of the boy. He enters a new situation where 
nothing is known to him. He can take care not to 
let other people think badly of him, not to let him- 
self be held in contempt by others. How this is ar- 


THE EDUCATION OF CHILDEEN 
ranged is not easy to explain. Family circumstances 
have a great deal to do with it. Probably every case 
requires a slightly different handling. It will, how- 
ever, be much easier to deal with such children when 
there are a goodly number of teachers versed in In- 
dividual Psychology, who will regard such cases with 
understanding eyes and be able to help the children 
in the school. 


CHAPTER FOURTEEN 


EDUCATING THE PARENT 

T his book, as we have indicated on several oc- 
casions, is addressed to parents and teachers, 
both of whom may profit equally from the new psy- 
chological insight into the mental life of the child. 
In the last analysis, it does not matter much 
whether the education and development of the child 
take place for the most part under the auspices of 
the parent or under the auspices of the teacher, 
provided the child gets the proper education. We 
are referring of course to extra-curricular educa- 
tion — ^not the teaching of subjects of study, but the 
development of personality, which is the most im- 
portant part of education. Now, although both the 
parent and the teacher can each contribute his share 
in this educational work— the parent correcting the 
deficiencies of the school, and the teacher correcting 
the deficiencies of the home — ^it is nonetheless true 
that in our large cities, and under modern social 
and economic conditions, the greater part of the 


 
responsibility falls on the teacher. Taken en masse 
parents are not as permeable to new ideas as are 
onr teachers, who have a professional interest in the 
education of children. The hope of Individual Psy- 
chology in preparing the children of to-morrow 
rests primarily on converting the schools and the 
teachers — although the co-operation of parents is 
of course never rejected. 

NTow in the course of the educational work of the 
teacher, there comes up inevitably a conflict Vv^ith 
the parent. The conflict is all the more inevitable in 
that the teacher’s correctional work presupposes in 
some measure the failure of the parent. It is in a 
sense an accusation against the parent, and the par- 
ent very often feels it as such. How shall the 
teacher handle the parent in this type of situation? 

The following remarks are addressed to this 
problem. They are written, of course, from the 
point of view of the teacher, who needs to handle 
the parent as a psychological problem. If these re- 
marks are read by parents, they need give no of- 
fense, since they apply only to the unintelligent 
parent who forms the mass phenomenon that the 
teacher has to deal with. 

Many a teacher has remarked that it is often 
more difficult to approach the parents of a problem 


 
cliild than it is to approach the child himself » This 
fact indicates that it is always necessary for the 
teacher to proceed with a certain amount of tact. 
The teacher must always act on the assumption that 
the parents are not responsible for all the bad qual- 
ities the child shows. The parents are after all not 
skillful pedagogues and they usually have only 
tradition to guide them. When they are summoned 
to school on account of their children they come 
feeling like accused criminals. Such a mood, he- 
spealdng as it does some inward consciousness of 
guilt, demands the most tactful treatment at the 
hands of the teacher. It is therefore most desirable 
that the teacher should try in such cases to change 
the parents’ mood to a friendly and a freer one, to 
place himself at the disposal of the parents as an 
assistant and to rely on their good intentions. 

The parents should never be reproached even 
when there are just grounds. We can achieve much 
more when we succeed in establishing a sort of pact, 
when we persuade the parents to change their atti- 
tude and work with us according to our methods. 
It is of no avail to point out to them the faults in 
their past treatment. WTiat we must do is to try to 
make them adopt a new procedure. To tell them 
that they have done this or that wrongly, only of- 


 
fends them and makes them unwilling to co-operate. 
As a rule the deterioration of a child does not take 
place out of a clear sky; there is always a past his- 
tory. The parents come to school in the belief that 
they have overlooked something. They should never 
be permitted to feel that we think so; they should 
never be spoken to categorically or dogmatically. 
Suggestions to parents should never be made in an 
authoritative manner. The sentences should always 
have a “perhaps,” “probably,” “possibly,” “you 
might try it this way.” Even if we know exactly 
where the mistake is and how it is to be corrected, 
w'e should never point it out to the parents bluntly 
as if we want to force them. It goes without saying 
that so much tact is not always to be found in every 
teacher, neither is it acquired suddenly. It is inter- 
esting to see the same thoughts expressed in the au- 
tobiography of Benjamin Franklin. He writes 
there: 

“A Quaker friend having kindly informed me 
that I was generally thought, proud, that my pride 
showed itself frequently in conversation, that I was 
not content with being in the right when discussing 
any point, but was overbearing and rather insolent, 
of which he convinced me by mentioning several in- 
stances, I determined endeavoring to cure myself, 

: M2 


 
if I collide of this vice or folly among the rest^ and 
I added Humility to my 1st, giving an extensive 
meaning to the word. 

“I cannot boast of much success in acquiring* the 
reality of this virtue, but I had a good deal mtli re- 
gard to the appearance of it. I made it a rule to 
forbear all direct contradiction to the sentiments of 
others, and all positive assertion of my own. I even 
forbid myself, agreeably to the old laws of our 
Junto, the use of every word or expression in the 
language that imported a fixed opinion, such as cer- 
tainly, undoubtedly, etc., and I adopted, instead of 
them, I conceive, I apprehend or I imagine a thing 
to be so or so, or so it appears to me at present. 
When another asserted something that I thought 
an error, I denied myself the pleasure of contra- 
dicting him abruptly and of showing immediately 
some absurdity in his proposition; and in answer- 
ing I began by observing that in certain cases or 
circumstances his opinion would be right, but in the 
present case there appeared or seemed to me some 
difference, etc. I soon found the advantage of this 
change in my manner ; the conversations I engaged 
in went on more pleasantly. The modest way in 
which I proposed my opinions procured them a 
readier reception and less contradiction; I had less 



 
mortification when I was found to be in the wrongs 
and I more easily prevailed with others to give up 
their mistakes and join with me when I happened 
to he in the right. 

“And this mode, which I at first put on with 
some violence to natural inclination, became at 
length so easy, and so habitual to me, that perhaps 
for these fifty years past no one has ever heard a 
dogmatical expression escape me. And to this habit 
(after my character of integrity) I think it prin- 
cipally owing that I had early so much weight with 
my fellow-citizens when I proposed new institu- 
tions, or alterations in the old, and so much in- 
fluence in public councils when I became a member ; 
for I was but a bad speaker, never eloquent, subject 
to much hesitation in my choice of words, hardly 
correct in language, and yet I generally carried my 
points, 

“In reality, there is, perhaps, no one of our nat- 
ural passions so hard to subdue as pride. Disguise 
it, struggle with it, beat it down, stifle it, mortify 
it as much as one pleases, it is still alive, and will 
every now and then peep out and show itself; you 
will see it, perhaps, often in this history; for, even 
if I could conceive that I had completely overcome 
it, I should probably he proud of my humility.”’ 



 

It is true that these words do not fit every situa- 
tion ill life. This can neither be expected nor de- 
manded. Franklin®s attitude, nevertheless, shows us 
how unsuitable and unsuccessful aggressive opposi- 
tion may be. There is no basic law in life which 
holds good for every situation. Every rule goes 
only so far and then all of a sudden becomes un- 
workable. There are certainly situations in which a 
strong word is the only right one. However, when 
we consider the situation between the teacher on the 
one hand, and, on the other, the worried parents 
who have already experienced humiliation and are 
prepared for further humiliation on account of 
their child, and when we also consider that without 
the parents’ co-operation we can do nothing, it is 
obvious that Franklin’s method is the only logical 
one to adopt in order to help the child. 

Under such circumstances, where it is of no im- 
portance to be able to prove that one is right, or to 
show one’s superiority, hut where it is necessary to 
prepare the road which we must tread to help the 
child, there are naturally many difiicuities. Many 
parents do not want to hear any suggestions. They 
are astonished or indignant, impatient and inimical 
because the teacher has placed them and their child 
in such an unpleasant situation. Such parents have 


 
iisually been trying for some time to dose tlieir eyes 
to the faults of their child, to blind themselves to 
reality. Suddenly their eyes are forcibly opened for 
them. The whole matter is most disagreeable, and 
it is understandable that a teacher who approaches 
such parents brusquely or too energetical!}’ loses all 
possibility of winning the parents over to his side. 
Many parents go even further. They meet the 
teacher with a verbal tide of indignation and make 
themselves imapproachable. In such cases it is het“ 
ter to show the parents that the teacher is depend- 
ent upon their assistance ; it is better to quiet them 
and bring them to the point of speaking in a 
friendly manner with the teacher. It must not be 
forgotten that parents are often so entangled in the 
meshes of traditional, antiquated methods that they 
cannot free themselves quickly. 

For example, when a father has discouraged his 
child badly by stern words and a sour facial expres- 
sion, it is naturally hard for him, after ten years, 
suddenly to assume a friendly expression and to 
speak kindly to the child. It might be mentioned 
here that when a father suddenly changes his whole 
attitude towards his child, the latter will not believe 
at first that the change is a sincere one. He will re- 
gard it as a trick and will have to gain confidence 



 
slowly in liis parent’s changed demeanor. Highly 
intellectual persons are no exceptions. There is a 
case of a high school principal who had driven liis 
son almost to the point of breakdown by constant 
criticising and nagging. The principal realized this 
in a conversation lie had with us ; then he went home 
and delivered a scathing sermon to his son. He had 
lost his temper again because his son had been lazy. 
Every time his son did something which did not 
please liini his father lost his temper and spoke 
cruelly. When this is possible with a man who con- 
siders himself a pedagogue we can imagine how it 
is with those parents who have grown up with the 
dogmatic idea that every child must be punished for 
his mistakes by a whipping. Every device Imown to 
diplomatic art, every tactful phrase which occurs 
to the teacher must be employed in conversations 
with parents. 

It must not be forgotten that the custom of edu- 
cating children to the accompaniment of blows is 
widely spread in the poorer classes. And so it hap- 
pens that children from these ranks, going home 
after a corrective conference with their teacher, find 
a continuation in the form of a whipping awaiting 
them from their parents. We are in the sad state of 
having to remember that our pedagogical efforts 


THE EDUCATION OP CHILDREN 
are all too frequently brouglit to naught by the un- 
wise parental treatment at home» In such cases^ 
children are often punished twice for the same mis- 
take, when we are of the opinion that once is 
eiio'ogh. 

We know the terrible results which sometimes 
follow such double punishment. Take the case of a 
child who must bring home a bad report card. 
Afraid of a whipping, he does not show it to his 
parents, and then afraid of punishment at school, 
he plays truant; or else he forges his parent’s sig- 
nature to the card. We must not overlook these 
facts, nor must we regard them liglitly ; we must al- 
ways regard the child in his relation to the various 
elements in his environment. We must ask our- 
selves : What happens now when I go ahead. How 
will it affect this child. Wliat certainty have I that 
it will have a benehcial effect on him? Has the child 
gotten to the point where he can bear a burden, and 
wall he be able to learn something constructive 
from it? 

We know how differently children and adults re- 
act to difficulties. We must be most careful in re- 
education and must be reasonably certain of results 
before we attempt to remould the life pattern of a 
child. He who has always proceeded with delibera- 



 
tioii and objective judgment in the education and 
re-education of children will be able to predict with 
greater certainty the results of his efforts. Practice 
and courage are essential in pedagogical work, as 
is also the unshakable belief that no matter what 
the circumstances may be, there is always a way to 
prevent a child from having a breakdown. First of 
all, there is the old and well-recognized rule that it 
is never too early to start. He who is accustomed to 
regard a human being as a unity and to regard 
symptoms as part of a unity, will be able to under- 
stand and to help a child very much better than he 
who is accustomed to seize upon a symptom and 
treat it according to some rigid scheme — as in the 
case, say, of a teacher who, when a child has failed 
to do his homework, immediately writes a note 
about it to the child’s parents. 

We are entering a period which is bringing with 
it new ideas, new methods and new understanding 
in . Science is doing away 
with old worn out ci|stoms and traditions. The 
knowledge we are gaining places more responsibil- 
ity on the teacher, but as a compensation it gives 
him far more understanding of the problems of 
childhood and with it far greater ability to help the 
children who pass through his hands. The impor- 


 
taut tiling to remember is that a single conduct 
manifestation has no meaning when detached from 
the personality as a whole, and that we can under- 
stand it only when we study it in coiinection 
the rest of the human being. 


APPENDIX I 


AN INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGICAL 
QUESTIONNAIRE 

For tlie Understanding and Treatment of Problem- 
Children, Drawn up by the International 
Society of Individual Psychologists. 


plaint? What sort of situation (psychic or other- 
wise) did the child j&nd himself in when his failings 
were first noticed? 

The following are important: change of en- 
vironment, beginning of school life, births in 
the family, younger or older brothers and sis- 
ters, failures in school, changes of teachers or 
school, new friendships, illnesses of the child, 
divorce, new marriage, death of the parents. 

age in regard to mental or physical weakness, tim- 
idity, carelessness, reserve, clumsiness, envy, jeal- 
ousy, dependence on others when eating, dressing, 
washing or going to bed? Was the child afraid of 



 
being alone or of darkness? Does lie understand his 
sexual role? Any primary, secondary or tertiary 
characteristics of gender? How does lie regard the 
opposite sex? How far has he been enlightened on 
his sexual role? Is he a stepchild? Illegitimate? A 
foster child? Orphan? How did his foster parents 
treat him? Is there still a contact? Did he learn to 
speak and walk at the right time? Without diffi- 
culty? Was the teething normal? Noticeable diffi- 
culties in learning to read, draw, sing, swim? Is he 
particularly attached to either his father, his 
mother, his grandparents or his nurse ? 

It is necessary to determine whether he is hos- 
tile towards his environment, and to look for 
the origin of his feeling of inferiority ; whether 
there is a tendency to avoid difficulties and 
whether he shows traits of egoism and sensi- 
tiveness. 

whom does he fear most? Does he cry out at night? 
Does he suffer from enuresis? Is he domineering 
towards weaker children or towards stronger chil- 
dren as well? Did he show a strong desire to sleep 
in his parents’ bed? Was he clumsy? Did he suffer 
from rickets? What about his intelligence? "Was lie 
much teased and derided? Does he show vanity in 
regard to his hair, clothes, shoes, etc.? Does he in- 


 

diilge in nail-biting or nose-picking? Is he greedy 
when eating? 

It would be illuminating to know if he strives 
more or less courageously after priority; fur- 
ther, if obstinacy prevents him fro^m pursuing 
his impulse to action, 

erance towards persons and animals, or does he 
molest and torment them? Is he fond of collecting or 
hoarding? What about avarice and covetousness? 
Does lie lead others? Is he inclined to isolate him- 
self? 

These questions are in connection with the 
child’s ability to “get in touch” and the degree 
of his discouragement. 

is the present position of the child? How does he con- 
duct himself in school? Does he like school? Is he 
punctual? Is he excited before going to school? Is 
he ill a hurry? Does he lose his books, satchel, 
exercise-books? Is he excited about exercises and 
before examinations ? Does he forget to do his school 
work, or does he refuse to do it? Does he waste his 
time? Is he lazy? Is there a lack of concentration? 
Does he disturb the class? How does he regard the 
teacher ? Is he critical, arrogant, indiiferent towards 



 
the teacher ? Does he ask others to help him with his 
lessons or does he wait until he is invited ? Is lie am- 
bitious in regard to gymnastics and sport? Does he 
consider himself comparatively untalented or en- 
tirely so? Is he a great reader? What sort of litera- 
ture does he prefer? 

Questions that help us to understand how far 
the child is properly prepared for school life, 
the result of the “going to school experiment,” 
and his attitude towards difficulties. 

stances, illness in the family, alcoholism, criminal 
tendencies, neurosis, debility, lues, epilepsy, the 
standard of living. Any deaths in the family, and 
how old was the child when they occurred? Is he an 
orphan? Who is the dominating spirit of the family? 
Is the home education strict, with much grumbling 
and fault-finding, or is it indulgent? Are the home 
influences such as to make the child afraid of life? 
What about supervision? 

From his position and attitude in the family 
circle we may judge of the impressions the 
child receives. 

place in the family constellation? Is he the eldest, 
the youngest, the only child, the only boy, the only 



 ' 
girl? Is there rivalry, much crying, malicious laugh- 
ter, a strong tendency to depreciate others? 

The above is important for the study of char- 
acter, and throws light on the child’s attitude 
towards others. 

of a profession ? What does he think about man-iage ? 
What profession do the other members of the family 
follow? What about the married life of the parents? 

It may be concluded from this whether the 
child has courage and confidence for the future. 

in history and fiction? Is he fond of spoiling other 
children’s games? Is he imaginative? Is he a cool- 
headed thinker? Does he indulge in daydreaming? 

These questions are in reference to a possible 
tendency to play the hero in life. A contrast in 
the child’s behavior may be regarded as a sign 
of discouragement. 

odical dreams about flying, falling, powerlessness, 
late arrival at railway station, anxiety dreams? 

In this connection we often find a tendency to 
isolation, warnings to be careful, ambitious 
traits and a preference for particular persons, 
country life, etc. 




 

Does he consider himself neglected? Does lie re- 
spoiid readily to attention and praise ? Has lie super- 
stitious ideas? Does he avoid difficulties ? Does he try 
his hand at various things only to give them up 
again? Is he uncertain about his future? Does he be- 
lieve in the injurious effects of heredity ? Was he sys- 
tematically discouraged by those around him? Is his 
outlook on life pessimistic? 

Answers to these questions will help us to 
prove that the child has lost confidence in him- 
self and that he is now on the wrong road. 

grimacing, pretending to be stupid, childish, comi- 
cal ? 

In such cases slight courage is manifested for 
the purpose of attracting attention, 

footed? Knock-kneed or bow-legged? Stunted? Ab- 
normally stout or tall? Badly proportioned? Has he 
constitutional abnormalities of eye or ear? Is he 
mentally backward? Left-handed? Does he snore at 
night? Is he remarkably handsome? 

These are disadvantages which the child as a 
rule overestimates, and by which he may be 
permanently discouraged. A faulty develop- 


 


meiit is often seen too in the case of very pretty 
children who become obsessed with the idea 
that they should get everything they want 
without exerting themselves. Such children 
miss numerous opportunities of preparing 
themselves for life. 

of talent” for school, for work, for life? Does he liar™ 
bor suicidal thoughts? Is there any connection in 
point of time between his failures and troubles ? Does 
he overrate apparent success ? Is he servile, bigoted, 
rebellious ? 

Here we have manifestations of extreme dis- 
couragement, mostly apparent after vain ef- 
forts on the part of the child to get rid of his 
troubles. His failures are due partly to the in- 
effectuality of his efforts and partly to a lack 
of understanding of persons in touch with him. 
But his inclinations must be satisfied somehow, 
somewhere; so he seeks some other, easier 
scene of action. “Nebenkriegsschauplatz.” 


ful. 

Such “positive performances” give us impor- 
tant hints, for it is possible that the interests, 
inclinations and preparations of the child point 
in a different direction from that in which he 
has hitherto gone. 

From answers to the above questions (which 


 
should never be put in regular sequence or roiitine- 
like, but constructively and by way of conversation) 
a correct notion of the individuality is formed. It 
will be seen that though the failures are not justified, 
they are conceivable and can be understood. The er- 
rors disclosed should always be explained in a pa- 
tient and friendly way, without any threats. 


APPENDIX II 


FIVE CASE HISTORIES WITH 
COMMENTARIES 

I 

A boy, iifteen years old, is the only child of par- 
ents who have worked hard to achieve a modestly 
comfortable existence. They have been careful to 
see that the boy had everything necessary for physi- 
cal health. In his early years the boy was happy and 
healthy. His mother is a good woman, but she cries 
too easily. Her report of her son is made with much 
effort and many interruptions. We do not know the 
father, but the mother describes him as an honest, 
energetic man who loves his family and who has 
much confidence in himself. When the boy was very 
young and was disobedient, the father would re- 
mark, *Tt would be a fine state of affairs if I couldn’t 
break his will.” His idea of “breaking” was setting 
the boy a good example, not bothering to teach him 
much, but whipping him whenever he did something 


 
wrong. In the boy’s early childhood, his rebellious” 
ness was expressed by Iiis wanting to play master of 
the bouse, a desire frequently found in the spoiled, 
only child. He showed early a striking inclination to 
disobedience and developed the habit of refusing 
to obey so long as he did not feel the hand of his 
father. 

When we stop here and ask what salient charac- 
ter trait will surely develop in this child, we must 
answer, “Lying.” He will lie to escape his father’s 
heavy hand. It is indeed the chief complaint with 
which the mother comes to us. To-day the child is 
fifteen years old and the parents never know whether 
he is lying or telling the truth. When we probe a lit- 
tle more deeply, we hear the following; The child 
was for a time in a parocliial school, w4ere his 
teachers also complained that he was disobedient and 
disturbed the class. For example, he would shout the 
answer to a question before he was asked, or he would 
ask a question in order to interrupt, or talk loudly to 
his classmates during class.. He would write his 
homework in a most illegible hand — ^he w>-as, more- 
over, left-handed. His conduct finally got beyond all 
bounds and his lying was noticeable as soon as lie 
feared punishment from his father. His parents at 


 
first decided to leave turn in the school, hot be- 
fore long they had to take him out because his 
teacher concluded that nothing could be done with 

him. 

The boy looked like a lively lad whose intelligence 
was recognized by all the teachers. He finished pub- 
lic school and had to take the entrance examinations 
for high school. His mother awaited him after the 
examination and he told her that he had passed the 
test. Every one was very happy and they all went to 
the country for the summer. The boy frequently 
spoke of high school. Then the high school reopened. 
The boy packed his schoolbag, went to school and 
came home each day for lunch. One day, however, 
the mother walked with him part of the way and as 
they crossed the street together, she heard a man 
say, “There’s the boy who showed me the way to the 
station this morning.” His mother asked him what 
the man meant, and whether he hadn’t been to school 
that morning. The lad answered that school had 
ended at ten o’clock, and he had walked with the man 
to the railroad station. His mother was not satisfied 
with the explanation and later spoke to the father 
about the matter. The father decided to accompany 
his son to school the following day. The next day, on 



 
tlie way to school, the father learned, in answer to his 
insistent questioning, that the boy had failed in his 
entrance examinations, that he had never been to 
high school, and that he had loafed around the 
streets all these days. 

His parents engaged a tutor and the boy was 
eventually able to pass the examinations, but his con- 
duct did not improve. He still disturbed the class- 
room procedure, and one day he began to steal. He 
stole some money from his mother, lied violently 
about it, and only confessed when threatened with 
the police. And now we have before us a case of sad 
neglect. The father, whose pride was such that he 
thought he could bend this twig, now gives his son 
up as hopeless. The boy is punished by being left 
alone with no one speaking to him or paying any at- 
tention to him. His parents also claim that they no 
longer beat him. 

In answer to the question “Since when has there 
been cause for complaint?” the mother replies, 
“Since his birth.” When we receive such an answer, 
we assume that the mother wants to imply that the 
boy’s bad conduct is inborn, since his parents have 
tried everything to straighten him out, and have been 
unsuccessful. 




 
Asa baby, the boy was extremely restless, he cried 
day and night. All the doctors, however, declared 
that he was quite normal and healthy. 

This is not as simple as it sounds. There is nothing 
remarkable in the fact that nursing infants cry. 
There are many reasons for it, especially in the case 
of an only child where the mother has had no previ- 
ous experience. Such children usually cry when they 
are wet, a condition of which the mother is not al- 
ways aware. What did his mother do when he cried? 
She took the baby in her arms, rocked it and gave it 
something to drink. What she should have done was 
to find out the real cause of the crying, make the 
child comfortable and then pay no more attention to 
him. The child would have stopped crying and would 
not now have this black spot in his past. 

His mother says that he learned to talk and walk 
at a normal age without difficulty, and that his teeth 
developed normally. He had a habit of destroying 
his playthings soon after they were given to him. 
Such manifestations are often found without neces- 
sarily indicating a bad character. Worthy of note is 
the sentence, “It was impossible to make him occupy 
himself for any length of time with any one thing,” 
We must ask here how should a mother train a child 


 


to play alone. There is only one way to do it. The 
child must be permitted to occupy himself without 
constant interruption by adults. We suspect that 
this mother did not do this and several remarks indi- 
cate it; for example, that the boy always gave her 
a lot to do, that be always clung to her, etc. Here are 
the child’s first attempts to induce his mother to 
pamper him, the oldest inscriptions on the scroll of 
his soul. 

The child was never left alone. 

The mother obviously says that in self-defense. 

He was never alone and to this day he does not 
like to he left alone even for an hour. Evenings he is 
never alone^ and he has also never been left alone 
during the night hours. 

Here is proof of how closely the child is tied to his 
mother and how he has always been able to lean on 
her. 

He was never afraid^ and does not know fear to- 
day. 

That is a statement which challenges psychologi- 
cal common sense since it does not agree with our 
findings. A closer examination of the facts gives us 
the explanation. The boy has never been left alone ; 




 
there was, therefore, no necessity for him to be 
afraid, since with such children fear is a means to 
compel others to remain with them. Consequently 
there was no place for fear, an emotion which he 
would have manifested as soon as he was left alone. 
Now comes another seeming contradiction. 

He has a great fear of Ms father's cane. So he did 
have fear? MHien the whipping was over^ however, 
he forgot it quickly and was lively again, even 
though he was sometimes spanked severely. 

Here we see the unfortunate contrast: the mother 
yielding; the father stern, wanting to correct the 
mother’s softness. And the child is driven more and 
more in the direction of his mother through his 
father’s harshness. That is to say, he turns toward 
the person who pampers him, toward the person 
from whom he can get everything easily and cheaply. 

In the parochial school, at the age of six, he came 
under the supervision of the priests, and at that time 
the complaints began about his liveliness, restlessness 
and inattentiveness. Complaints about his conduct 
were much more frequent than about his school- 
work. What was most noticeable was his restless- 
ness. When a child wants to attract attention what 
better method can he choose than to be restless ? This 


 
child wants to be noticed. He has formed the habit of 
attracting his mother’s attention, and now, in a 
larger circle, he wants the attention of the new mem- 
hers of the larger group at school. When the teacher 
does not understand the child’s purpose, he attempts 
to correct the child’s conduct by singling him out for 
scolding or for reprimanding, and the boy is then 
where he wants to be. He has to pay a big price for 
the attention he secures, but he is used to that. He 
received enough beatings at home and remained un- 
changed. Are we to assume that he is to be dislodged 
from his old ways by the milder forms of punishment 
permitted the school? That is most improbable. 
When he condescended to go to school, he wanted to 
be the center of attention as a compensation. 

The parents tried to improve his behavior by 
pointing out to him that it was necessary for the good 
of the class that every one keep quiet. When one 
hears such antiquated admonitions, one is somewhat 
dubious about the common sense of the parents. The 
boy knows as well as the grown-ups what is right and 
what is wrong. He is, however, busy with quite an- 
other problem. He wants to he noticed and he cannot 
gain any attention in school by being quiet ; neither 
is it easy to gain attention by hard work. We see no 
riddle in his conduct as soon as we are aware of the 



 
task he has set himself. Obviously, when the father 
comes along with his cane, the boy will be quiet for a 
while. But the mother says that as soon as the father 
goes away, the boy starts all over again. He regards 
the whippings and punishments only as interrup- 
tions which disturb his progress for short periods, 
but do not by any means achieve the effect of per- 
manent change. 

But his temperament always broke through the 
restraint. 

Children who want to attract attention must ob- 
viously do it by temperament. We see that what one 
usually calls temperament is nothing more than a 
convenient rhythm in which one fulfills tasks and is 
a form of movement determined by the goal. For 
example, if one wants to lie quietly on the sofa one 
will not need to develop such temperament. This 
temperament becomes a suspicious indication of 
what a person has in mind — in our case, to make 
himself conspicuous. 

Me formed the habit of taking all sorts of things 
from the house to school, exchanging them for 
money and entertaining his comrades with the pro- 
ceeds. When his parents discovered this he was 


 
searched each day before leaving for scJiooL He 
finally abandoned the practice and confined, himself 
to playing jokes and making interruptions,- This 
change was brought about only by severe punish- 
ment from his father. 

We can understand his playing jokes; that be- 
longs to his desire to make others notice him, to force 
his teacher to penalize him and to make himself su- 
perior to the school regulations. 

His attempts to ci'cate disturbances gradually 
diminished^ hut returned periodically in full force 
and resulted in his being expelled from one school. 

Here is the confirmation of what we said before. 
This boy, w^ho struggles to obtain recognition from 
others, naturally meets obstacles and becomes aware 
of them. In addition, when we consider that he was 
left-handed, we have more insight into his mind. We 
can deduce that although he wanted to avoid diffi- 
culties, he always managed to find them and then 
lacked confidence to tackle them. But the less con- 
fidence he had in himself the more he wanted to 
demonstrate that he was worthy of attention. He 
did not cease his mischief-making until the school 
coidd no longer tolerate him and expelled him. 
When one has the justifiable standpoint that the 


 
school cannot permit one sinner to disturb the work 
of ali the other students, there remains nothing else 
to do but expel the sinner. However, when we be- 
lieve that the purpose of education is to correct 
shortcomings, expulsion is not the right method. It 
made it easier for the boy to obtain recognition from 
his mother, and he no longer had to exert himself in 
school. 

It is to be noted here that he was, on the advice of 
one teacher, sent to a home during the vacation 
period. There he was under more strict supervision 
than even at school and this experiment was also a 
failure. His parents, however, were still the chief 
supervisors. The child went home every Sunday — a 
fact which pleased him very much. Yet, when he was 
not allowed to go home, he did not sulk. This is un - 
derstandable. He wanted to play the great man and 
be regarded as such by others. He made no fuss 
about a whipping, did not permit himself to cry, nor 
in any way to behave in an unmanly fashion, no mat- 
ter how disagreeable things were. 

His school report cards were never very had; he 
always had tutoring at home. 

We conclude from this, that he was not inde- 
pendent. The parents were told by the teacher that 


THE EDUCATION OE CHILDREN 
the boy could learn very much better if only he were 
somewhat quieter. We are convinced that the boy 
can learn since there are no children, apart from the 
feeble-minded, who cannot learn. 

He has no talent for drawing. 

This is important since it may be assumed from 
the statement that he has not entirely overcome the 
clumsiness of his right hand. 

He is one of the best in the gymnasium; he learned 
to swim quickly and has no fear of danger. 

That shows that he is not completely discouraged, 
but that he has been using his courage for unimpor- 
tant things — ^for those things which he could do 
easily and in which he was sure of success. 

He is a stranger to shyness and tells every one 
what he thinks ^ no matter whether it happens to he 
the janitor or director of the school^ in spite of the 
fact that he has been admonished time and again not 
to be forward. 

We already know that he pays no attention when 
he is forbidden to do this or that, and we cannot 
therefore accept his lack of shyness as evidence of 
courage. We know that many children are well 


THE EDUCATION OP CHILDREN 
aware of the distance that separates them from the 
teachers and officials of the school This boy who is 
not afraid of being whipped by his father^ is nat- 
urally not afraid of the principal and speaks impu- 
dently in order to make himself important, and in 
this way lie actually achieves his goal. 

Me is not quite certain about Ms seoo, but says fre- 
quently that he wouldn^t like to be a girl. 

There are no definite indications as to his opinion 
of his own sex, but we always find in boys of such 
mischievous character the tendency to degrade girls. 
They derive a sense of their own superiority from 
the degradation of the girls. 

He has no real friends. 

This is quite understandable, since other children 
do not always like to give him the role of leader. 

His parents have not explained sex matters to him 
as yet. His behavior is always an expression of a de- 
sire to rule. 

He himself knows the facts which we have to get 
about him ivith so much effort. That is to say, he 
knows well what he wants, but he unquestionably 
does not know the connection between his uncon- 


 
scious goal aod his behavior. He does not understand 
the extent and origin of this intense desire to rule. 
He wants to rule because he sees his father ruling, 
and the more he wants to rule, the weaker he really 
is, because he has to depend upon others ; while his 
father, wdiom he has taken as a model, rules in a self- 
contained manner. In other words his ambition feeds 
on his weakness. 

He always wants to start something, even with 
those stronger than he is. 

These stronger persons are, hov/ever, weaker be- 
cause they take their duties seriously. The boy only 
trusts himself when he can be impudent. Inciden- 
tally, it will not be easy to rid him of this impudence 
because he has no faith in his ability to learn any- 
thing and, therefore, has to hide behind this im- 
jjudence. 

He is not selfish, he gives freely. 

If one were to assume this to be a sign of good- 
ness, it would be difficult to find the connection with 
the rest of his character. We know that one can show 
superiority by being generous. It is important to see 
how this trait fits in with a lust for power. This gen- 
erosity is felt by him as a personal elevation. It is 


 
probable that he lias learned from his father this 
trick of showing off by being generous. 

He still makes a lot of trouble. He is afraid first 
of all of Ms father j then of his mother. He is ready to 
get wp at any hour and is not particularly 'vain. 

This last concerns outer vanity, since his inner 
vanity is extraordinarily great. 

He has given up the old habit of picking his nose. 
He is a stubborn child, fussy about food, does not 
like vegetables or fats. He is not completely wicom- 
pa7iionable, hut prefers those children with whom he 
can do anything, and, likes animals and flowe?'S very 
much. 

A liking for animals always has as a background 
a striving for superiority, a desire to rule. Such a lik- 
ing is certainly not objectionable since it tends 
toward a union with all things earthly. With such 
children, however, we find that it expresses a wish 
to rule, and always tends to give the mother some- 
thing more to attend to. 

He manifested a great desire for leadership, to be 
sure 7 wt for mtellectual leadership. He developed a 
teiidency to collect things, hut not possessing suf- 
ficient patience, no collection was ever completed. 



THE EDUCATION OF CHILDEEN 


The tragedy of such persons consists in the fact 
that they leave everything unfinished, because they 
are afraid of the responsibility of a completed re- 
sult. 

On the whole Ms behavior has improved since the 
age of ten. It wa^ impossible formerly to keep him in 
the house since he always wanted to play the hero on 
the streets. His improvement has been brought about 
at the cost of great effort. 

To confine him to the narrow limits of the house 
proved in reality the best means of satisfying his 
strong desire for self-assertion. Small wonder that 
he does more mischief within these narrow coniines. 
He should have been left on the street under proper 
supervision. 

When he comes home he turns to his school worh^ 
shows no desire for leaving the house ^ hut finds ways 
for wasting his time. 

We shall always be confronted with distraction 
and time-wasting when we confine a child to such a 
narrow sphere that he has always to work under 
supervision. He must he given an opportunity for 
activity — for joining other children so as to he able 
to play a role among his fellows. 



 

He med to go gladly to school. 

Tills suggests that his teacher was not severe. In 
this way he was easily able to play the part of a hero. 

He used to lose most of his school books. He was 
not afraid of examinations^ he always believed that 
he could do everything brilliantly. 

We find here a rather common trait. The fact that 
a given person is optimistic under all circumstances 
shows that he does not believe in himself. Such per- 
sons are certainly pessimists, but they manage to do 
violence to logic, taking refuge in a dream world 
where they can attain everything; they display no 
signs of surprise when they are confronted with de- 
feat. They are possessed of a feeling of predestina- 
tion enabling them to appear as optimists. 

He sufers from a great lack of concentration. He 
is liked by some teachers and greatly disliked by 
others. 

In any case he seems to be liked by the milder 
teachers who are pleased with his manners. He also 
disturbs them less, because no difficult tasks are as- 
signed to him. Like most spoiled children, he lacks 
either the inclination or the habit of concentration. 
Up to the age of six he felt no need for this, since 


 
his mother took care of everything. Everything in 
life had been prearranged, as if he were enclosed in 
a cage. His lack of preparation made itself felt as 
soon as he was confronted with difficulties. He had 
acquired no means for meeting difficulties, he had 
no interest in others so as to be able to co-operate 
with them. He had neither the desire nor the self- 
confidence necessary to accomplish something inde- 
pendently. What he possessed was the desire for 
prominence — the desire to get to the front without 
any effort. But he failed to disturb the peace of 
the school — ^iie failed to get attention, and this made 
his character worse. 

He always wanted to take everything easily, and 
get everything in the easiest way without regard for 
other people. This had become the dominant motif of 
his life, which was expressed in ail his specific acts, 
such as thefts and lies. 

The mistake underlying the development of his 
life style is obvious. His mother, to be sure, supplied 
him with a stimulus for developing his social senti- 
ments, but neither his mother nor his stern father 
succeeded in determining* their further course. These 
sentiments were confined to the world of Ms mother. 
In his mother’s presence he felt himself to be the 
center of attention. 





 

His striving for superiority was thus no longer 
directed towards the useful side of life but towards 
the vanity of liis own person. In order to bring him 
to the useful side of life, the development of liis char- 
acter must be started anew. His confidence must be 
gained, so that he would gladly listen to us. At the 
same time we must widen the sphere of his social re- 
lations and in this way make good what the mother 
failed to do with the only child. He will have to be 
reconciled with his father. His education has to pro- 
ceed step by step until the boy will be able to under- 
stand the mistake of his past life stjde in the same 
way that we understand it. Since his interest will no 
longer be focussed upon a single person, his inde- 
pendence and courage will grow and he will direct 
his superiority striving towards the useful side of 
life. 

II 

This is a case of a ten-year-old boy. 

! T/ie complaint of the school is that his work is poor 
and that he is three terms behind. 

Ten years old and three terms behind — we would 
suspect that he is feeble-minded. 



 


Me is now in SB. His I. Q. is 101. 

He therefore cannot be feeble-minded. What can 
be the cause of his backwardness? Why does lie cor- 
rupt the class? We see a certain striving and a cer- 
tain activity on his part, but all on the useless side. 
He wants to be creative, active and the center of at- 
tention, but in the wrong way. We can also see that 
he fights the school. He is a fighter. He is an enemy 
to the school, and, therefore, we understand why he 
should be backward, the routine of the school is very 
difficult for such a fighter. 

He is slow to obey commands. 

This is very obvious. He acts intelligently, that is 
to say, there is a method in his madness. If he is a 
fighter then he has to resist commands. 

He fights with other boys; he brings toys to school. 

He wants to make his own school. 

He is had in oral arithmetic. 

This means that he lacks social-mindedness and 
the social logic that goes with it ( See Chapter VII) . 

He has a speech defect and goes to a speech class 
once a week. 


 

This speech defect is not based on an organic de- 
ficieiicy» This is a symptom of a lack of social co- 
operations which shows itself in his impeded speech. 
Language is an attitude of co-operation — ^the indi- 
vidua! has to connect himself with another person. 
As things are, the boy uses this speech defect as a 
tool for his combativeness. We need not wonder that 
he does not seek to remedy this speech defect, for to 
remedy it means to give up this tool with which he 
attracts attention. 

When the teacher talks to him he moves his body 
from side to side. 

It is as if he were preparing an attack. He does 
not enjoy having the teacher speak to him, because 
he is not the center of attention. The teacher is the 
conqueror if she speaks and he has to listen. 

The mother (to be exact, the stepmother, since the 
mother died in his infancy) only complains that he is 
nervous. 

This mysterious idea of nervousness covers a mul- 
titude of sins. 

He was brought up by two grandmothers. 

One grandmother is bad enough — ^we know that 
grandmothers usually pamper the children in a ter- 


 
rible way. It is worth while to consider why they do 
it. It is the fault of our culture — ^there is no place for 
older women. They rebel against this treatment and 
want to be treated rightly — wherein they are quite 
right. The grandmother wants to prove the impor- 
tance of her existence and she does this by pamper- 
ing the children and getting them to cling to her. In 
this way she asserts her right to be recognized as a 
personality. 

If you hear that there are two grandmothers then 
you can understand that there is a terrible competi- 
tion going on. One will want to prove that the chil- 
dren like her more than the other. Naturally, under 
this competition for its favor the child finds himself 
in a sort of paradise where he gets everything he 
wants. All he needs to say is, “The other grand- 
mother gave me this,” and the other will want to out- 
bid her rival. At home this child is the center of at- 
tention, and we can see how he makes this attention 
his goal. Now he is in school where there are not two 
grandmothers — there is only one teacher and many 
children. The only way he can be the center of at- 
tention here is by fighting. 

During the time he was living with the grand- 
mothers he did not get good marks at school, 



 

The school was not the right place for him. He 
was not prepared for it. The school was a test of his 
ability to co-operate, and he was not trained for it. A 
mother is the one who can best develop this ability 
for co-operation. 

The father rem.arried a year and a half ago and 
the child lives with the father and stepmother. 

Here "^ve find, of course, a difficult situation. The 
trouble begins or the trouble is increased when a 
stepmother or stepfather enters into the situation. 
The problem of step-parents is traditional and it 
has not yet been improved; the child especially 
suffers. Stepmothers, even of the best kind, gen- 
erally have trouble. One need not say that the 
problem of step-parents is insoluble, but it can be 
solved only in a certain manner. Stepmothers and 
stepfathers should not expect appreciation as their 
right, but they should try their best to win ap- 
preciation. With two grandmothers to complicate 
the situation, the difficulty of the stepmother with the 
child is increased. 

The step)mother tried to be affectionate when she 
first came into the family. She did all she could to 
win the boy. An older brother is a problem also. 



THE EDUCATION OF CHILDEEN 

Another fighter in the family, and think of the 
terrible rivalry between the two brothers which 
only increases the general combativeness. 

The child fears the father and obeys him, but 
he does not obey the mother. Therefore she reports 
him to the father. 

This is reaUy a confession that the mother can- 
not educate the child, and so she puts it up to the 
man. When the mother always reports to the father 
what the children do and do not do, when she 
menaces them with the words, “I will tell your 
father,” the children understand that she is not 
able to manage them and has given up the job. So 
they look for occasions to boss her. When the 
mother speaks and acts in this way she expresses 
her inferiority complex. 

Mother will take him out to places and buy him 
things if he promises to behave. 

The mother is in a difficult situation. Why ? Be- 
cause the grandmother overshadows her, as the 
children think the grandmother is more important. 

The grandmother sees him only occasionally. 

It is very easy for a person who comes only for a 


 
few hours to meddle with the children and leave 
all the trouble for the mothero 

There does not seem to he any one in the family 
who really loves the child. 

It appears that they do not like him any more. 
After spoiling him by pampering, even the grand- 
mother now dislikes him. 

The father whips him. 

The whipping does not help, however. The child 
likes praise and if praised he is always wholly con- 
tented. But he does not know how to earn praise 
by acting in a right way. He prefers to demand 
praise from the teacher without earning it. 

He works better if he receives praise. 

This is of course the case with all children who 
want to be the center of attention. 

Teachers do not like him because he is sullen. 

This is the best means he could use, because he 
is a fighter. 

The child suffers from enuresis. 

This is also an expression of his desire to be the 


 


center of attention. He is not fighting in a direct 
way but in an indirect way. How can such a child 
fight his mother in an indirect way? By wetting 
the bed and making her get up in the middle of the 
night; by screaming out in the night; by reading 
in bed instead of going to sleep ; by not getting up 
in the morning; by bad eating habits. In short, he 
always has some means to occupy the mother with 
him, both in the daytime and at night. Enuresis 
and speech defect — with these two weapons he 
fights the environment. 


The mother has tried to rid him of this habit by 
waking him several times in the night. 

The mother is therefore with him several times in 
the night. Thus, even in this way he attains his goal. 


Children are not fond of the boy because he 
wants to boss them. A few weak ones try to imitate 
him. 

He is a weak and discouraged person, and does 
not want to carry on in a courageous manner. The 
weak children in the school like to imitate him be- 
cause this is really the right way for weak children 
to gain attention. 




 

On the other hand, he is not really disliked, and 
"dke other children are glad to think that he has 
improved whenever his work is chosen as the best.'" 

Tlie cMIdren are glad when he improves. This is 
also a very good indication about the teacher. The 
teacher really understands how to make the eO“ 
operative spirit live in the children. 

The hoy likes to play hall on the street with other 
children. 

He has relations with others when he is sure to 
succeed and conquer. 

The case was discussed with the mother and it 
was explained to her that she was in a very difficult 
situation with the child and the grandmothers. It 
was also explained to her that the boy is jealous 
of the older brother and is always afraid that he 
may be left behind. During the interview the boy 
did not speak a word although he was told that we 
were all his friends at the clinic. Speech for this 
boy would mean co-operation. He wants to fight, 
and so instead of speaking he refrains from speak- 
ing. It is the same lack of social-mindedness which 
we saw expressed in his refusal to do anything 
about his speech defect. 

This may seem astonishing, but it is a fact that 


 
we very often find even adult persons who act this 
way in social life — ^they fight by not speaking. 
There was once a couple who had a violent quarrel. 
The husband screamed very loudly and said to his 
wife, “Just see, now you are silent!” She replied, 
“I am not silent, I only do not speak!” 

In the case of this boy he, too, “only does not 
speak.” When the interview was over he was told 
that he could go but he did not seem to want to 
leave. He was antagonized. He was told that the 
discussion was over and still he did not go. He was 
told to come again with the father next week. 

In the meantime, we said to him. “You acted 
quite rightly not to speak since you always do the 
contrary thing. If you are told to speak, you are 
silent; when you should be silent in school, then you 
corrupt the class by your talking. You believe that 
in this way you are a hero. If we told you, ‘Don’t 
speak at all!’ then you would speak. We only need 
to lead you on and ask the contrary of what we 
want.” 

The child obviously could be made to speak be- 
cause it would be necessary for him to answer ques- 
tions. In this way he would co-operate by speech 
and language. Later on the situation could be ex- 
plained to him and he could be convinced of his 


 

mistakes, and in this way gradually improved. 

In this connection, it should be borne in mind 
that so long as such a child is in his old accustomed 
situation he has no incentive to change. The mother, 
father, grandmothers, teachers, comrades — all fit 
into his accustomed life-style. His attitudes are 
fixed in respect to them. But when he comes to the 
clinic it is an altogether new situation that con- 
fronts him. We must even try to make this new 
situation as new as possible — a totally new environ- 
ment in fact. He will better reveal the character 
traits belonging to the old situation to which he is 
trained. It is a good idea in such a case to tell him 
“you must not speak at all!” Whereupon he will 
say, “I will speak!” In this way nobody has en- 
tered into conversation with him directly, and he is 
not on guai’d with his inhibitions. 

At the clinic, the children generally stand before 
a large audience, and this impresses them very 
much. It is a new situation and it gives the impres- 
sion that they are not only not tied up with their 
own small environment but that others are also 
interested, and that they are thus a part of a larger 
whole. All this makes them want to be more a part 
of the whole than before, especially if they are 
asked to come again. They know what will happen 


 
— they will be questioned and asked how they are 
getting on, etc. Some come once a week and some 
come every day depending on the nature of the 
case. They are trained for their behavior toward 
the teacher. They know that they will not be accused, 
reproached or criticized, but that everything will be 
judged as if through an open window. This always 
impresses people. If a couple have a quarrel and 
some one opens a window, the quarrel stops, and 
it is a wholly different situation. When a window 
is open and they can be heard, people do not want 
to give expression to their mistaken character 
traits. This is one step forward, and this is made 
when children come to the clinic. 

HI 

This is the case of an oldest child, thirteen and a 
half years old. 

At the age of eleven he had I. Q. 0 / 140. 

It might, therefore, be said that this is a bright 
child. 

Since he entered the second term of high school 
he has made very little progress. 

From experience we know that if a child be- 


 
lieves lie is bright, lie very often expects every- 
thing without effort, and the consequence is that 
siicli children are very often brought to a stop. 
We find, for instance that these children in the 
period of adolescence feel they are much more 
grown up than they really are. They want to prove 
that they are not children any more. The more 
they attempt to express themselves, the more 
they meet the difficulties of real life. They then 
begin to doubt whether they are really as clever as 
they have hitherto regarded themselves. It is not 
advisable to tell a child he is bright or that he has 
an I. Q. of 140. Children should never know their 
I. Q. and neither should the parents. All this ex- 
plains why such a bright child should fail later. 
It is a situation fraught with danger. A child who 
is very ambitious and who is not sure of having a 
success in the right way, will look for a wrong way 
in which to be successful. Some of these wrong 
ways are : to become neurotic, to commit suicide, to 
commit crimes, to become lazy or to waste time. 
There are a hundred varieties of alibis that chil- 
dren use in order to be successful in a useless way. 

Favorite subject is science. Associates with boys 
younger than hiniself. 




 

We know that children join with younger chil- 
dren in order to have things easier; in order to be 
superior and be the leader. It is a suspicious sign 
if children like to associate with younger children, 
although it need not always be so — sometimes the 
attitude is that of a father. But there is always a 
certain weakness involved, because the expression 
of a paternal instinct involves the exclusion of play 
with older children. This exclusion is a conscious 
act. 

Likes football and baseball. 

We can presuppose, therefore, that he is very 
good in these games. Probably we shall hear that 
he is quite good in certain directions, but in some 
things not even interested. It means that wherever 
he is sure of success, there he will be active ; wher- 
ever he is not sure of success, he refuses to par- 
ticipate. This is of course not the right way to act. 

Plays cards. 

That means wasting time. 

This seems to take his attention away from the 
iirsual routine of going to bed early and doing his 
home work in the proper time, 



 

Now we are coming to real complaints and these 
are ail focused on the same point. He cannot go 
ahead in liis studies and he therefore simply wastes 
time. 

As an infant he developed slowly. After two 
years he began to develop rapidly. 

In these two years we do not know why be de- 
veloped slowly. He was probably pampered and 
what we have is the result of a pampered child- 
hood. The slow development might have been due 
to this pampering. We see pampered children 
who do not want to speak or move or function be- 
cause they like being supported, and they are thus 
not stimulated to develop. But when he develops 
rapidly the only explanation is that there was a 
stimulus for development. Probably there was some 
strong stimulus that made him a bright and intel- 
ligent child. 

Outstanding features are honesty and stubborn- 
ness. 

It is not enough for us that he is honest. It is all 
very nice and is really an advantage, but we do not 
know if he does not use this honesty in order to 
criticize others. It may very well be a way for him 


 
to boast. We know that he is a person who likes 
to lead and to boss others, and this honesty could 
be an expression of his superiority striving. We 
are not sure whether if this hoy were in an unfavor- 
able situation he could continue to be honest. As re- 
gards his stubbornness, we find that he really wants 
his own way and likes to be different and not led by 
others. 

He hulUes Ms younger brother. 

In this statement our judgment is confirmed. 
He wants to be a leader, and because his younger 
brother does not obey he bullies him. This is not 
very honest and you will find, if you really know 
him, that he is something of a liar. He is a boasting 
person and we see his feeling of superiority. What 
is expressed here is really a superiority complex, 
but this superiority complex shows clearly that he 
is at bottom suffering from a sense of inferiority. 
He undervalues himself because overvalued by 
others, and because he undervalues himself, he has to 
make up for it by boasting. It is not wise to praise a 
child too much because then he gets the idea that 
much is expected of him. When he does not find it 
easy to meet expectations, he begins to tremble and 
to be afraid, and the result is that he will organize his 


 
life so that Hs weakness will not be discovered. Ergo, 
he bullies his brother, etc. This is his style of life. He 
does not feel strong enough and confident enough 
to solve the problems of life independently and 
properly. Hence his passion for playing cards. 
When he plays cards nobody can discover his in- 
feriority, even if he has bad school reports. The 
parents would say his bad reports are due to the 
fact that lie always plays cards, and in this way his 
pride and vanity are saved. He becomes imbued 
with this idea: “Yes, because I like cards I am not 
a good pupil ; if I did not play cards I would be the 
best pupil. But, I play cards.” He is satisfied, 
and he has the comfortable feeling that he could 
be the best. As long as this boy does not under- 
stand the logic of his own psychology he can wail 
to himself and hide his feeling of inferiority both 
from himself and from others. And so long as he 
can do this, he will not change. Hence, in a very 
friendly manner, we must reveal to him the springs 
of his character and show him that he really acts 
like a person who does not feel strong enough to 
accomplish his work. He feels strong enough only 
to hide his feeling of weakness, his feeling of in- 
feriority. This should be done as we have said, in 
a friendly manner and with constant encourage- 


 
nieiit. We should not always praise him and wa¥e 
his high I. Q. before him — constant reminder 
was probably what made him afraid he might not 
always have success. We know quite well that later 
in life the I. Q. is not very important ; all good ex- 
perimental psychologists know that an I. Q. can 
only show a present situation as revealed in the test 
and that life is too complicated and cannot be 
known in a test. A high I. Q. is no proof that a 
child is really able to solve all the problems of life. 

The boy’s real difficulty is his lack of social- 
mindedness and his feeling of inferiority. And this 
must be explained to him. 

IV 

This is the case of a boy eight and a half years 
old. This case illustrates how children are pam- 
pered. Criminal and neurotic types spring chiefly 
from the class of pampered children. The great 
need of our age is that we stop pampering children. 
This does not mean that we have to stop liking 
them, but it means that we have to stop indulging 
them. We should treat them like friends and equals. 
This case is valuable for the way it portrays the 
features of a pampered child. 



 

Present problem: Mepeated every grade in school 
and is now only in the 2 A grade. 

A child who repeats classes in the first years of 
school may very well be suspected of feeble- 
mindedness. We must keep that possibility in mind 
in our analysis. On the other hand, with a child 
who starts out well and then slumps, feeble-minded- 
ness may be ruled out. 

Talks haby talk. 

He wants to be pampered: therefore be imitates 
a baby. But this means that he must have a purpose 
and goal in mind, since he regards it as an ad- 
vantage to act like a baby. The existence of a 
rational conscious plan in this case rules out feeble- 
mindedness. He did not like school work as he was 
not prepared for school. And so, instead of de- 
veloping along social lines in school, he expresses 
his striving by antagonizing and fighting the en- 
vironment. This attitude of antagonism is of course 
paid for by his being left back in every class. 

Disobeys and fights badly with the older brother. 

Hence we see that the older brother is for him 
a hindrance. From this we can presuppose that the 
older brother must be a good pupil. The only way 


 
he can compete with his older brother is by being 
bad. Also in his dream life he imagines he would 
be ahead of his brother if he were a baby. 

Walked at twenty-two months. 

He probably suffered from rickets. If he did not 
walk until twenty-two months then it is also prob- 
able that he was always watched, and that his 
mother was with him continually during these 
twenty-two months. We can see how this organic 
imperfection has been a stimulus for the mother to 
watch him more and pamper him. 

He talked early. 

Now we are sure that he is not feeble-minded. 
Feeble-mindedness is expressed largely in the dif- 
ficulty of learning to speak. 

He always talks hahy talk. The father is very 
affectionate. 

He also pampers him. 

He ijrefers the mother. There are two hoys in 
the family. Mother says the older hoy is clever. 
The two hoys fight a great deal. 

It is a case of rivalry of children in the family. 



 
It is present in most families, especially between 
the first two children in the family, but there is 
often rivalry between any two children 'who grow 
up together. The psychology of the situation is the 
fact that when another child comes along, the first 
is dethroned, and, as we have seen (Chap. 8) the 
situation can be prevented only if children are 
properly prepared for co-operation. 

Me does poorly in arithmetic. 

The greatest difficulty in school for the pam- 
pered child is usually arithmetic, for arithmetic in- 
volves a certain social logic which pampered children 
do not have. 

There must he something wrong with his head. 

We cannot find it. He acts quite intelligently. 

The mother and teacher believe that he mastur- 
bates. 

It is possible that he does. Most children do 

masturbate. 

The mother says he has dark rings under his eyes. 

We cannot properly conclude to the practice of 


 


masturbation from the presence of rings under the 
eyes, although people generally are suspicious of it. 

He is very finicky in eating. 

We see how he always wants to occupy his 
mother, even in connection with his eating. 

He is afraid of the dark. 

Being afraid of the dark is also a sign of a pam- 
pered childhood. 

The child's mother says he has a lot of friends. 

We believe they are the ones he can boss. 

He is mt crested in music. 

It is instructive to examine the external ear 
among musical persons. One finds that the ear of a 
musical person has better developed curves. When 
we saw this boy we were positive that he had a fine 
and sensitive ear. This sensitiveness may express 
itself in a liking for harmony, and the person that 
possesses it may have a greater capacity for musical 
training. 

He likes to sing^ hut he has ear trouble. 

Such persons cannot easily endure our noisy life. 
Among such persons the tendency to ear infections 


 
is greater than among others. The formation of 
the auditor}?' organ is inherited, and that is why 
both musical talent and ear trouble are passed on 
from generation to generation. This boy is suffer- 
ing from ear trouble and in his family are some 
very musical persons. 

The proper course of treatment for the boy is to 
try to make him more independent and self-reliant. 
At present he is not self-reliant, but believes that 
it is necessary for his mother always to occupy 
herself with him and never to leave him alone. He 
is always wanting to be supported by the mother, 
and mothers are of course only too glad to give this 
support. He is now to be free to do what he wants 
— ^free to make mistakes. For it is only in this way 
that he can learn self-reliance. He is to learn not 
to compete with his brother for his mother’s favor. 
At present each brother feels that the other is pre- 
ferred, and each one is therefore needlessly jealous 
of the other. 

What is especially necessary is to make the boy 
courageous enough to face the problems of school 
life. For, think what will happen if he does not 
continue at school. The moment he breaks with 
school he will have deviated to the useless side of 
life. One day he will play hookey from school, 


THE EDUCATION OE CHILDREN 
another day he will stop school altogether, disap- 
pear from home and join a gang. An ounce of pre- 
vention is worth a pound of cure; it is better to 
adjust him now to school life than to have to deal 
later -with a juvenile delinquent. The school is now’' 
the crucial test. At present he is not prepared to 
solve problems in a social way and that is why lie 
has difficulties at school. But it is up to the school 
to give him new courage. Of course the school lias 
its own problems: perhaps the classes are over- 
crowded, and perhaps the teachers that he has come 
across are not well prepared for this work of psy- 
chological encouragement. That is the tragedy of 
things. But if this boy can hud a single teacher 
who can encourage and hearten him properly, then 
he will be saved. 

v 

A case history of a girl ten years of age. 

It ef erred to the clinic from school because of 
difficulties with arithmetic and spelling, 

Ai’ithmetic is usually a difficult subject for a 
pampered child. There is no rule that pampered 
children must be bad pupils in arithmetic, but we 
have very often found this to be our experience. 



 
We know that very often left-handed children have 
difficulties in spelling because they are trained to 
look from the right to the left side and when they 
read they read from the right to the left. They read 
and spell correctly^ but reverse. Usually nobody un- 
derstands that they read in the right way, only 
reverse. They know only that they cannot read and 
they will simply say that they cannot read or spell 
correctly. Thus we suspect that the girl may 
be left-handed. Perhaps there is another reason 
why she has difficulties in spelling. In New York 
we must think of the possibility that perhaps she 
is from another country, and therefore does not 
understand English properly. In Europe we do 
not have to take such a thought into account. 

Important points in past history: The family 
lost most of its money in Germany. 

We do not know when they came from Germany. 
This girl probably had once experienced good 
times which suddenly came to an end. This is al- 
ways a new situation which is like a test. In this 
new situation it will be revealed whether she has 
been rightly trained for co-operation and whether 
she is socially adjusted and courageous. It will also 
be revealed whether or not she can bear the burden 


 
of being poor — which means in other words, 
whether she can co-operate. It seems that she can- 
not co-operate properly. 

She was a good pupil in Germany, and was eight 
years old when she left Germany. 

This was two years ago. 

She does not get along well in school here be- 
cause the spelling is difficult and arithmetic is not 
taught in the same way as in Germany. 

The teacher does not always make allowances 
for this. 

Pampered by the mother, to whom she is very 
much attached. Likes both parents the same. 

If you ask children the question “Whom do you 
prefer, your mother or your father?” they will gen- 
erally give the answer, ‘T like them both the 
same!” They are taught to give this answer to such 
a question. There are many w'ays to test the truth 
of this answer. A good way is to put the child be- 
tween the two parents and when we speak to the 
parents the child will move towards the one to 
whom she is most attached. We can see the same 
thing when the parents are in a room and the child 


 
enters. Again she will go to the one to whom she 
is most attached. 

She IiG^ a few girl friends of her own age, but 
not many. Marliest remembrances: At the age of 
eight she was in the country with her parents and 
used to play with a dog in the grass. They also had 
a carriage at this time. 

She remembers her riches, the grass, the dog and 
the carriage. It is the same as with a man who was 
formerly rich and always looks back to the days 
when he had a car, horses, a fine house, servants, 
etc. We can understand that she does not feel con- 
tented. 

Dreams about Christmas and what Santa Claus 
will bring her. 

Her dream life expresses the same outlook as her 
waking life. She always wants to have more be- 
cause she feels deprived and wants to regain what 
she has had in the past. 

Leans on the mother. 

This is a sign of her discouragement and of her 
difficulties at school. It was explained to her that 
things were harder for her than for the other chil- 
dren and that she could learn by studying more 
and by being courageous. 



THE EDUCATION OP CHILDREN 

She came to the clinic again, ^without her mother. 
She is getting along a little better in school and 
has been doing everything alone at home. 

She was advised to be independent, not to de- 
pend upon the mother and do everything alone. 

She cooked breakfast for father. 

This is a sign of a sense of developing co- 
operation. 

She believes she is more courageous, and seemed 
to be more at ease in this interview. 

She is to return and bring the mother. 

She retm’ned with the mother, who came for the 
first time. The mother had been working hard and 
could not get away before. She reports that the 
child is a foster child and was adopted when two 
years old, and does not know that she is a foster 
child. In her first two years she was in six dif event 
places. 

This is not a nice past. It seems as though this 
girl suffered very much in the first two years» 
Thus we have to do with a child who was probably 
once hated and neglected and then came into the 
good care of this woman. The child wants to cling 
to this favorable situation because of the micon- 


THE EDUCATION OE CHILDREN 
scions impression in her mind of her early had ex- 
periences. Ill two years a child can be very much 
impressed. 

fVhen the mother took the child she was told that 
she must he very strict as the child^s family was not 
a good one. 

The person who gave this advice was poisoned 
with the idea of heredity.. If she should be strict 
and the girl should turn out a problem child then 
the judge would say, “You see, I am right!” He 
would not know that he is the guilty one. 

The mother xms bad and the foster mother feels 
a greater responsibility for the girl because she is 
not her own child. She sometimes hits the child. 

The situation is not so favorable as before. The 
pampering attitude ceases sometimes and instead 
she is punished. 

The father pampers the child and gives her what- 
ever she wants. If she wants something she will 
not say ^'please'" or ‘Hhank youT She says "‘you 
are not my mother."^ 

Either the child knows the fact or uses a phrase 
which hits the right spot. We know of a hoy of 
twenty, who does not believe his mother is his real 


 
mot!iei% and yet the parents swear that the child 
could not know it. Evidently he had such a feel- 
ing. Children form conclusions out of very small 
tilings. “The child does not know she is adopted,” 
hut sometimes they feel it. 

She says this to the mother hut not to the father. 

The father does not give her a chance to attack 
him in that way because he gives her everything. 

The mother cannot understand the change at the 
new school. Now she has a bad report card and 
she has had to hit her. 

The poor child has a bad report card, she is 
humiliated and feels inferior, and then the mother 
spanks her — it is too much. Even one of these two 
things would be too much — either to be spanked 
or to get a bad school report. This is a matter 
to be considered by the teachers, who should realize 
that when they give children bad school reports, 
it is the beginning of more trouble at home. A wise 
teacher would avoid giving bad school reports if 
she knew that the bad reports would be an occasion 
for the mother to spank the child. 

The child says that she sometimes forgets herself 
and has an outhtirst of temper. She is excited at 



 
school and corrupts the class. She believes she must 
always be the first. 

Vfe can understand this desire in an only ehild 
trained by the father to get everything that she 
wants. We can understand that she likes to be the 
first. W e know that in the past she had the country 
fields, etc., and that she feels deprived of her past 
advantages. Now her superiority striving is much 
stronger, hut as she has no channels for its expres- 
sion, she forgets herself and makes trouble. 

It was explained to her that she must learn to 
co-operate. We told her that she gets excited in 
order to be the center of attention, and that her 
outbursts of temper are only an excuse to get 
everybody to look at her. She does not work in 
school because her mother is angry with her reports 
and she is fighting the mother. 

Dreams that Santa Claus brought her many 
things. Then she awakes and finds nothing. 

Here again she wants always to arouse such 
feelings and emotions of having everything that 
she wants and “awakes and finds nothing,” We 
must not overlook the snake in the grass. If we 
arouse such feelings and emotions in a dream and 
awake and see nothing, then we will naturally feel 



 
disappointed. Yet the dream arouses only the feel- 
ings which are consistent with the attitude after 
awakening. In other words, the emotional goal of 
the dreams is not the arousing of marvelous feel- 
ings of possessing everything — the emotional goal 
is precisely, to be disappointed. It is for this pur- 
pose that the dreams are created until the goal is 
satisfied and the disappointment takes place. In 
melancholia, persons have marvelous dreams but 
awake and find things quite the contrary. We can 
understand why this girl w^ants to be disappointed. 
She wants to accuse the mother since her present 
life must appear to her in very dark colors. She 
feels that she has nothing and the mother does not 
give her anything. “She spanks me; only father 
gives me things.” 

Summing up this case we can see that the child 
always wants to be disappointed so that she can 
accuse the mother. She is fighting the mother and 
if we want to stop this fight, we must be able to 
convince her that her behavior at home, her dreams 
and her behavior at school are all of the same mis- 
taken pattern. Her mistaken style of life is largely 
the result of the fact that she has been only a short 
time ill America, and is not very well trained in the 
English language. We must therefore convince 


 
her that these difficulties could be easily overcome, 
but that she is deliberately using them as a weapon 
with which to fight her mother. We must also influ- 
ence the mother to stop spanking the child, so as 
not to give her an excuse for fighting. The child 
must be brought to realize that “I am not attentive 
and forget myself, and have outbursts of temper 
because I want to have trouble with my mother.” 
If she knows this, then she can stop her bad be- 
havior, Before she knew the meaning of all the 
experiences and impressions in her home and school 
life and in her dreams, a change of character was 
of course out of the question. 

And so we see what Psychology is — to under- 
stand the use a person makes of his impressions 
and experiences. Or, in other words. Psychology 
means to understand the scheme of apperception 
by which the child acts and by which he reacts to 
stimuli, to understand how he regards certain 
stimuli, how he responds to them, and how he uses 
them for his own purposes. 



GEORGE ALLEN & UNWIN LTD 
London: 40 Museum Street, W.C.i 

Auckland: 24 Wyndham Street 
Bombay: 15 Graham Road, Ballard Estate, Bombay 1 
Calcutta: 17 Clnttaranjan Avenue, Calcutta ij 
Cape Town: log Lcmg Street 
Karachi: 234 Ingle Road 

New Delhi: 13-14 Ajmeri Gate Extension, New Delhi 1 
Sao Paulo : Avenida p de Julho 1138-Ap. 51 
Sydney, N.S. W.: Bradbury House, 55 York Street 
Toronto: gi Wellington Street West 



ALFRED ADLER 
Understanding Human Nature 

Based upon Adler’s lectures at the People’s Institute in Vienna, 
this book presents the fundamentals of Individual Psychology, it 
is written in a manner comprehensible to the intelligent adult, and 
ofters stimulation to the student for further research into the 
problems touched upon. The author demonstrates the application 
of his psychological theory to the trials of everyday life. In this way 
the individual is able to achieve some knowledge of himself, thus 
helping him to adjust himself to the community and to play his 
part in the progress of society. 

Chapters include the following: 

BOOK I : HUMAN BEHAVIOUR 

The Soul; Social Aspects of the Psychic Life; Child and Society; 
The World We Live In; Feelings of Inferiority and the Striving 
for Recognition; The Preparation for Life; Sex; The Family 
Constellation; 

BOOK II: THE SCIENCE OF CHARACTER 

General Considerations; Aggressive Character Traits; Non- 
Aggressive Character Traits; Other Expressions of Character; 
Affects and Emotions. 

De7ny Svo. Sixth Impression izs. 6d. net 


The Science of Living 

‘Those, however, who have been put off by what they have read of 
psychoanalysis can be confidently recommended to consider the 
views put forward by Adler .... A book which deserves to be 
widely read.’ Holhom Review. 

‘For teachers I know no better guide than Adler. I hope the book 
will be taken up by ail training colleges.’ Daily News 
‘Can be earnestly recommended.’ Medical Times. 

Crown Svo. Third Impression I 25 . 6d. net 



ALFRED ADLER 

What Life Should Mean to You 


‘It is impossible to convey any adequate impression of the unusual 
interest of this book. Very few people .... will be able to read it 
without wanting to possess it.’ Mother and Child 

‘A book to be read and pondered by teachers and social workers.’ 

Journal of Education. 

‘There is such a wealth of common-sense and of true observation 
scattered through the book ... It is to be hoped that the influence 
of Adler’s teaching will spread and increase. ’ The Listener. 

‘Heartily commended to parents, teachers and to Christian 
ministers who take seriously the cure of souls. ’ British Weekly. 
Demy %vo. Sixth Impression i6s. net 


Guiding the Child 

This book, now in its third impression, was the result of exper- 
ience gained by a group of physicians and teachers who, during 
the 1920’s, organised a number of child guidance clinics in differ- 
ent parts of Europe, under the leadership and inspiration of Alfred 
Adler. 

It is not a symposium but an organised and connected account of 
the problems, accomplishments and failures encountered in daily 
work, reported from actual experience by the experts in charge. 
Adler edited the volume and directed the work, making his own 
contribution, so that there should be no omission or repetition. It 
makes a closely knit account of inestimable value to the welfare 
worker, the physician and the forward-looking parent. 

Crown %vo. Third Impression 8i. 6d. net 



LEWIS WAY 
Adler^s Place in Psychology 

Adler's Place in Psychology mill leave no one in any doubt as to 
what is really the voice of Alfred Adler in the field of psychology 
and what has been so often, both before and since his death, the 
easy plagiarism of less gifted minds. 

A scholar, dealing with his subject in a deeply studied language, 
which has the merit of being his mother tongue, Lewis Way has 
written this account of Adler’s Individual Psychology, with 
clarity, open-mindedness and gusto. Lewis Way was himself a 
student and personal friend of Adler’s, and is therefore in a good 
position to understand not only individual psychology as a subject, 
but Adler as a man. 

Any ordinary layman can read this book with pleasure and even 
amusement, while a scholar seeking accurate information as to 
Adler’s theories and their origin, can come away from it both 
interested and satisfied. 

Demy %vo. i 8 j . net 


Man’s Quest For Significance 

A new and provocative application of psychological theories to 
modern social and political problems. 

‘A brilliant analysis of modern democracy. His book is so well 
written and so interesting that one positively has the excitement of 
wondering what comes next.’ Listener. 

‘This is a stimulating and important book, and a perusal of it will 
do much to correct the fallacies of other schools of psychology and 
sociology.’ Enquiry. 

‘A refreshing approach to social psychology.’ The Friend. 

Demy Zvo. 12S. 6d. net 




DAVID HAROLD FINK 
Release From Nervous Tension 
‘Dr. Harold Fink emphasizes and gives many illustrations of the 
fact that emotional conflicts produce bodily disease. Writing on 
the war on nerves, he says, “Half the battle is to understand what 
it is all about. The other half is to do something positive about it.” 
He follows this up by giving clearly defined help on both these 
points. This is a fascinating work written by one with a wide 
knowledge of the subject, and a deep understanding of the human 
mind and the tortuous paths it can follow. It should be found of 
much value by sufferers from nervous tension, and by those 
dealing with them.’ Library Review. 

Crown ivo. Eighth Impression los. 6d. net 


Be Your Real Self 

Many people today are living under pressure of one kind or 
another — frequently pressures so severe that they become grow- 
ing threats to physical and mental health. In this new book Dr. 
Fink outlines his highly successful method of teaching people to 
cope with these major problems and to adjust themselves to the 
world about them. He is a practising neuropsychiatrist and his 
methods are based on very wide experience and careful scientific 
study. 

Detny 8w. I25. 6d. net 

For People Under Pressure 

In his psychiatric practice. Dr. Fink is constantly treating people 
who want to learn how to think things out for themselves and thus 
become independent, self-reliant and capable of living happily 
under the sharp prods of today’s mounting pressure and rapid 
change. Dr, Fink gives practical realistic answers and includes 
specific prescriptions for carrying out his advice. 

Crown ivo. About 12 s. 6d. net 