CHAPTER SEVEN


SOCIAL FEELING AND THE OBSTACLES 
TO ITS DEVELOPMENT 

I N contrast to the cases of superiority striving 
we have discussed in the previous chapters, 
there is to be found a tendency among many chiL 
dren and adults to unite themselves with other 
human beings, to accomplish their tasks in co- 
operation with others and to make themselves 
generally useful from a social point of view. Such 
manifestations may best be described by the term 
social feeling. What is the root of this feeling? 
This is a matter of some controversy. But so far 
as the present wi’iter has been able to discover, it 
seems that we have to do here with a phenomenon 
that is indissolubly connected with the very notion 
of man. 

One may perhaps ask in what sense such a psy- 
chological sentiment is more innate than the 
psychological striving for superiority. The an- 
swer -would be that both at bottom have the same 

.. 116 ■ ■■ 


 
core — that the individualistic desire for supremacy 
and the feeling of social-mindedness rest on the 
same basis in human nature. They both are ex™ 
pressions of a root desire for affirmation ; they dif- 
fer in their form, and their different forms involve 
different implicit judgments about human nature. 
Thus the individualistic striving for supremacy 
involves a judgment that the individual can do 
without the group, while the feeling of social^ 
iiiindedness involves the view of a certain depend- 
ence upon the group. As views on human nature, 
there is no doubt that the social feeling is superior 
to the individualistic striving. The former rep- 
resents a sounder and logically more fundamental 
outlook, while the latter is only a superficial view- 
point even though as a psychological phenomenon 
it is more often to be met with in the lives of in- 
dividuals. 

If we want to see in what sense the social feel- 
ing has truth’ and logic on its side we have only to 
observe man historically, and we shall notice that 
man has always lived in groups. Nor is this fact 
astonishing when we reflect further that those 
creatures who individually are not able to protect 
themselves have been compelled always to live to- 
ne 


 
getlier for self-preservation. We have only to coni” 
pare a human being with a lion to realize that man, 
regarded as a species of animal, is quite insecure, 
and that most other animals comparable in size to 
man are stronger and better armed by nature for 
physical offense and defense. Darwin observed 
that all animals whose defense equipment has been 
somewhat neglected by nature always travel in 
packs. The orang-utan, for example, with his ex- 
traordinary bodily strength, lives alone with his 
mate, while the smaller and weaker members of the 
ape family are always to be found in groups. The 
formation of groups serves, as Darwin has pointed 
out, as a substitute or compensation for that which 
nature has denied to the animals individually — 
claws, fangs, wings, etc. 

The formation of groups not only balances what 
the particular animals lack as individuals, but it 
also leads them to discover new methods of protec- 
tion which improve their situation. There are 
groups of monkeys, for instance, who know how 
to send out advance scouts to discover the presence 
of enemies. In this way they are able to bring to 
bear their massed strength so as to more than make 
up for the weakness of each member of the group. 

117 


 
We also find a buffalo herd massing itself together 
and thus defending the group successfully against 
individual enemies of far greater power. 

Animal sociologists who have studied this prob- 
lem also report that in these groups we often find 
arrangements which are the equivalent of laws. 
Thus the scouts that are sent ahead must live ac- 
cording to certain rules, and every blunder or in- 
fraction is punished by the whole herd. 

It is interesting to note in this connection that 
many historians assert that the oldest laws of man- 
kind were those which affected the watchmen of 
the tribe. If this is so, we have a picture of the in- 
vention of the group idea out of the inability of 
weaker forms of animal life to protect themselves. 
And in a certain sense the feeling of social-minded- 
ness is always a reflection of physical weakness and 
is inseparable from it. Thus in the case of human 
beings perhaps the most important situation that 
fosters social feeling is the helplessness and slow 
development of infants and children. 

In the whole realm of animal life we find no 
being except man whose young come into the 
world with such complete helplessness. Also, as we 
know, the human child requires the longest time to 
reach maturity. This is not because of the infinite 
118 


 
niimber of things a child must leam before he be- 
comes an adult, but because of the way he de- 
velops. Children need the protection of the parents 
Hiiicli longer because . their organism demands it, 
and the Iiiimaii race would die out if children were 
not afforded such protection. The physical weak- 
ness of the child may be taken as the occasion 
which links together education and social-minded- 
ness. Education is a necessity because of the 
child’s physical immaturity, and the goal of educa- 
tion is provided by the fact that the overcoming of 
the child’s immaturity can only be had by relying 
on the group. Education must necessarily be social 
in purpose. 

In all our rules and methods for the education 
of children we must always have the idea of com- 
munity life and social adjustment to it. Whether 
we know it or not we are always impressed more 
favorably by that which is good from the stand- 
point of the community, and less favorably by an 
act which is generally disadvantageous or harmful 
to society. 

All educational mistakes which we observe are 
mistakes only because we judge that they will pro- 
duce harmful effects on the community. All great 
accomplishments, and in fact all development of a 
119 



 
human being’s abilities take place under the pres- 
sure of social life and in the direction of social 
feeling. 

Let us take, for example, speech. A human 
being living alone needs no knowledge of speech. 
That human beings have developed speech is an 
indisputable indication of the necessity for com- 
munal life. Speech is a distinct bond between peo- 
ple and at the same time a product of tlieir living 
together. The psychology of speech is conceivable 
only when we use as a point of departure the idea 
of the community. Individuals living alone have 
no interest in speech. Whenever a child lacks this 
broad base of participation in the community and 
grows up isolated, his ability to speak will be re- 
tarded. What we call a talent for speaking can 
only be acquired and improved when one individ- 
ual attaches himself to others. 

It has been commonly assumed that those chil- 
dren who can express themselves better than others 
are simply more talented,. This is not true. Those 
children who find difiiculty in speaking or in mak- 
ing contact through speech usually do not have 
strong social feeling. Children who do not learn 
to speak well are frequently spoiled children, for 
whom their mothers do everything before the chiT 
120 


 
dreii have time to ask for anything. In this way 
they lose contact and the ability for social adjust- 
iiient because they do not need speech. 

There are also some children who are reluctant 
to speak because their parents never permit them 
to finish a sentence or to answer for themselves; 
others have been laughed at or ridiculed, and 
thereby discouraged. This constant correcting and 
nagging seems to be a widely spread malpractice 
in . The dire result is that 
such children carry with them for years a feeling 
of degradation and inferiority. One can notice it in 
such persons who use the stereotyped introduction 
before they begin a sentence: “But, please don’t 
laugh at me.” We hear this frequently and we 
recognize at once that such people were laughed at 
frequently when they were children. 

There is the case of a child who could speak and 
hear but whose parents were both deaf and dumb. 
He alway’-s cried without making any sound when 
he hurt himself. It was necessary to let his parents 
see the pain, but useless to make his suffering 
audible. 

The development of other abilities of human 
beings, for example, the growth of understanding 
or of a logical sense, is unthinkable without social 


121 



 
feeling. A man living absolutely alone lias no need 
of logic, or at least has no more need than any other 
animal. On the other hand, a man who is always 
in contact with others, who must use speech and 
logic and common sense in his dealings with others, 
must develop or acquire social feeling. This is the 
final goal of all logical thought. 

Occasionally the actions of people appear stupid 
to us when in reality these actions are quite intel- 
ligent in the light of their personal goals. This fre- 
quently happens with those people who think that 
everybody else must think as they do, which shows 
us how significant the factor of social feeling or 
common sense is in judgment (not to mention that 
the development of common sense would not be 
necessary if communal life were not so complicated 
and did not present the individual with so many 
intricate problems). We can very well imagine 
that primitive people have remained at a primitive 
level because the relative simplicity of their ex- 
istence did not stimulate them to deeper thought. 

Social feeling plays a most important part in 
the ability of human beings to speak and to think 
logically — two functions which we might almost 
regard as holy. If everyone attempted to solve his 
problems regardless of the community in which he 
122 


 
lived, or to use a language of his own, chaos would 
resiihL Social feeling gives a security which each 
individual can feel and which is for him the main 
support ill life. It may not he completely identical 
with the confidence that we derive from logical 
thought and truth, but it is the most palpable 
component of that confidence. To take an illustra- 
tion, why are calculating and counting so coil”* 
fidently accepted on ail sides so that we tend to 
regard as precisely true only that which we can 
express in numbers? The reason is that number 
operations are more easily communicable to our 
fellow men, at the same time that they are easier 
for the mind to work with. We do not have much 
confidence in truths which we cannot communicate 
to others and have others share with us. This train 
of thought was doubtless behind Plato’s attempt to 
model all philosophy on number and mathematics. 
We see the connection with social feeling even 
more closely from the fact that he wanted the 
philosopher to go back to the “cave,” that is to 
say, to participate in the life of his fellow men. 
Even the philosopher, he felt, could not live prop- 
erly without the security that comes from social 
feeling. 

Cliildren who have, so to speak, less of an ac- 
123 


 
cumulation of this feeling of security, reveal it 
when they come in contact with others or when 
they have to perform certain tasks on tlieir own 
initiative. They reveal it particularly in school in 
those subjects which require objective, logical 
thinking, as in mathematics. 

The conceptions for which a human being is 
prepared in childhood (for example, moral feel- 
ings, ethics, etc.) are usually presented in a one- 
sided manner. An ethics for a human being who is 
condemned to live alone is inconceivable. Morals 
are only in place when we think of the community 
and the rights of others. This view is a little more 
difficult to confirm when we think of aesthetic feel- 
ings, of our inclination to artistic creations. How- 
ever, even in the realm of art w’e can perceive a 
generally consistent impression which probably has 
its basic roots in an understanding of health, 
strength, correct social development, etc. So far 
as art is concerned the boundaries are elastic, and 
there is perhaps more room for individual taste. On 
the whole, however, even esthetics follows social 
lines. 

If the practical question is put to us — ^how can 
we tell the degree to which social feeling has been 
developed in a child? — ^we must answer that there 
124 . 


 
are certain conduct manifestations to be con- 
sidered. When we see, for example, that children, 
in their striving for superiority, force themselves 
to the front with no consideration for others, we 
may be sure that they have less social feeling than 
those children who avoid that particular procedure. 
It is impossible to imagine a child in our present 
civilization without some desire for individualistic 
supremacy. As a result, his degree of social feel- 
ing is usually not sufficiently developed. This is 
the condition which the critics of mankind, the old 
and modern moralists have always complained of 
— that man is by nature egotistical and thirties 
more of himself than he does of others. This has 
always been expressed in the form of a sermon 
which has no effect on children or adults, because 
nothing can be accomplished with this axiom alone, 
and people have eventually consoled themselves by 
thinking that everybody else is no better. 

When we deal with children whose ideas have 
become so confused that they have developed 
harmful or criminal tendencies, we must recognize 
that no amount of moral preaching has ever had 
any effect. In such a situation it is much more 
desirable to probe a little deeper in order to he able 
to abolish the evil by pulling up the roots. In other 
125 


 
words, we must relinquish our role of judge and 
assume that of comrade or doctor. 

If we constantly tell a child that he is bad or 
stupid, he will become convinced in a short time 
that we are right and he will not have sufficient 
courage thereafter to tackle any task presented to 
him. What happens then is that the child fails in 
whatever he tries to do. The belief that he is stupid 
takes firmer root. He does not understand that the 
environment originally destroyed his self-con- 
fidence and that he is subconsciously arranging his 
life to prove this fallacious judgment correct. The 
child feels himself less able than his comrades, he 
feels himself restricted in abilities and possibilities. 
His attitude shows unmistakably his depressed 
frame of mind, which is in direct proportion to the 
amount of pressure exerted upon him by an un- 
favorable environment. 

Individual Psychology has tried to show that the 
influence of the environment is always perceptible 
in every mistake made hy^a child; for example, a 
disorderly child is always in the shadow of a per«» 
son who puts his things in order ; a child who lies is 
always under the influence of a domineering adult 
who wants to cure the child of lying by harsh 
means. We can even detect traces of the environ- 


126 


THE EDUCATION OF CHILDBEN 
merit in a cliiH’s boasting. Such a child usually 
feels that praise is a necessity, and not the success- 
ful accomplishment of any given task; and in his 
striving for superiority he is constantly seeking to 
evoke laudatory comments from the members of 
his family. 

There are situations in the life of every child 
which parents have usually overlooked or misun- 
derstood. Thus, each child in a family of brothers 
and sisters is in a different situation. The first 
child has the unique position of having been for a 
while the only child. This experience is unknown 
to a second-born. The youngest child experiences 
a set of circumstances which not every child goes 
through, because he remains for a while the small- 
est and weakest in the environment. There are 
variations of these situations. When two brothers 
or two sisters grow up together, the one who is 
naturally older and more competent has overcome 
certain difficulties which the younger has still to 
conquer. The younger of two such children is in 
a relatively unfavorable position and feels it. To 
compensate for this feeling of inferiority, the child 
may increase his striving so as to overtake the older 
brother or sister. 


127 


 

Individual psychologists who have worked for 
a long time with children are usually able to detect 
the position that children have had in the family 
constellation. Wlien the older child is one that has 
made normal progress, the younger one has been 
stimulated to greater effort to keep up with the 
older. As a result the younger is usually more ac» 
tive and more aggressive. If the older child has 
been weak and has developed slowly, the younger 
is not forced to make quite so strong an effort in 
competition. 

It is, therefore, important to determine what 
position a child has had in the family since a child 
can be completely understood only when his place 
in the family constellation has been discovered. 
The youngest children in families bear umnistak- 
able signs of the fact that they have been the 
youngest. Of course there are exceptions but the 
most common type of the youngest child is the one 
who wants to surpass all the others, the one who 
is never quiet, who is always stirred to further ac- 
tion by the feeling and belief that he must eventu- 
ally amount to more than all the others. These 
observations are significant for the education of 
children because they condition the adoption of 
certain educational methods. It is impossible to 
128 


 
follow the same rules in handling all children. 
Each child is unique, and while we classify chil- 
dren according to certain general types, we must 
be careful to treat each child as an individual. This 
is a condition almost impossible to fulfill in the 
school, but certainly one obtainable at home. 

The youngest child belongs to the type which 
always wants to be in the foreground of any pic- 
ture and in many cases he is successful. This is an 
extraordinarily important consideration since it 
weakens considerably the notion of the inheritance 
of mental characteristics. When youngest children 
of different families bear so much resemblance to 
each other there is not much room for the belief in 
inheritance. 

Another type of youngest child, directly op- 
posite to the active one described above, is the com- 
pletely discouraged adolescent. Such a child is as 
indolent as possible. We can understand that the 
seemingly great difference between these two types 
is explainable psychologically. No one is so easily 
hurt by difficulties as he who has the inordinate 
ambition to excel all others. His ambition makes 
him unliappy, and when the obstacles seem almost 
insurmountable be takes to flight more quickly 
than one whose striving does not have such an im- 
129 


 
portant goal We see in these two' types of young- 
est child the personification of the Latin saying 
“Aiit Csesarj aut nullus” or, as we say^ or 
nothing.” 

In the Bible we can find excellent descriptions 
of youngest children which coincide exactly with 
our experience — for example, the stories of Jo-- 
seph, David, Saul, etc. The objection that may be 
raised that Joseph had a younger brother, Ben^ 
jamin, may be refuted by the fact that Benjamin 
was born when Joseph was seventeen years old, 
so that Joseph as a child was the youngest^ How 
often do we see in life families supported by the 
youngest child. We find confirmation for our as- 
sertion concerning the youngest child not only in 
the Bible but also in fairy tales. There is no fairy 
tale in which the youngest child does not surpass 
all his brothers and sisters — ^in German, Russian, 
Scandinavian or Chinese fairy tales the youngest 
is always the conqueror. It is impossible that this 
should he only coincidence^. It is probably caused 
by the fact that in former days the figure of the 
youngest child was much more salient than it is 
to-day. This type must have been better observed 
because it was probably easier to notice under 
primitive conditions. 


130 


 

Much more could be written about the charac“ 
teristics which children deyelop in accordance with 
their position in the family constellation. Oldest 
cliildren also have many characteristics in common 
and may be divided into two or three main types. 

The present witer bad been studying the matter 
for a long time and the subject was not quite clear 
in his mind when he accidentally stumbled upon 
a passage in Fontane’s autobiography. Fontane 
describes there how his father, a French emigrant, 
took part in a war of Poland against Russia. His 
father was always very happy when he read, for 
example, that ten thousand Poles had beaten fifty 
thousand Russians and put them to flight. Fontane 
could not understand Ms father’s joy. On the con- 
trary, he objected very much on the ground that 
fifty thousand Russians simply had to be stronger 
than ten thousand Poles, and “if that isn’t so, it 
doesn’t please me at all because the stronger should 
always remain the stronger.” In reading this para- 
graph we immediately^ junip to the conclusion, 
“Fontane is an oldest child I” Only an oldest child 
could make such a statement. He remembers his 
possession of power in the family when he was the 
only child and feels it an injustice to be dethroned 
by a iveaker person. As a matter of fact it has been 
131 


 
found that oldest children usually have a conserva- 
tive trait. They are believers in power, in rule, and 
in unbreakable laws. They have a tendency to ac- 
cept despotism quite frankly and without apology. 
They have the right attitude for positions of power 
because they have once occupied such positions 
themselves. 

There are exceptions, as we have said, in the 
types of oldest children. There is one exception 
which should be mentioned here. It concerns a 
problem in child life which has hitherto been neg- 
lected. This is the tragic role which an older boy 
plays when he has a younger sister. Descriptions of 
confused, completely discouraged boys have very 
often indicated, without the fact itself being men- 
tioned, that the trouble was a younger, clever 
sister. The frequency with which this occurs is not 
an accident because there is a natural explanation 
for it. We know that in our present civilization 
men are considered of more importance than 
women. A first-horn son is frequently pampered. 
His parents expect a great deal of him. His situ- 
ation is a favorable one until a sister suddenly ap- 
pears. The girl enters an environment which con- 
tains a spoiled older brother who regards her as an 
amioying intruder and who fights against her. 

132 


 
This situation spurs the girl on to make extraordi- 
nary effortSs and if she does not break down, this 
stimulation affects her whole life. The girl de- 
velops rapidly and frightens the older boy, who 
suddenly sees the fiction of masculine superiority 
destroyed. He becomes uncertain, and since nature 
has so arranged matters that girls between the 
ages of foui'teeii and sixteen develop mentally and 
physically more rapidly than boys, his uncertainty 
is likely to end in a complete defeat. He easily 
loses his belief in himself and gives up the fight, 
arranges plausible excuses, or puts difficulties in 
his own way which he can then use as alibis for 
ceasing to struggle. 

There is a great number of such first-born boys 
who are confused, hopeless, inexplicably lazy, or 
suffering from nervousness for no other reason than 
that they did not feel strong enough to compete 
with a younger sister. Such boys are sometimes 
possessed of an unbelievable hatred of the female 
sex. Their fate is usualjy a sad one because there 
are few people who understand their condition and 
can explain it to them. Sometimes it goes so far 
that parents and other members of the family com- 
plain, “Why isn’t it the other way around? Why 
isn’t the boy a girl, and the girl a boy ?” 

133 


 
Boys who are alone among several sisters also 
have characteristics in common. It is difficult to 
prevent a dominantly feminine atmosphere in a 
house where there are several girls and only one 
boy. It either happens that he is very much spoiled 
by all the members of the family, or that all the 
women exclude him. Such boys naturally develop 
differently, but certain traits are common to all of 
them. We know that the conception that boys 
should not be educated by women exclusively is 
very widespread. That is not to be taken literally, 
since all boys are first reared by women. But what 
is really meant is that boys should not he brought 
up in an environment of women. This is not an 
argument against femininity but against the mis- 
understandings which arise out of such a situation. 
It also holds good for a girl who grows up with 
boys. The boys usually look down upon the girl 
and she tries, as a result, to imitate the boys in 
order to be their equal, which is an unfortunate 
preparation for her later Hfe. 

No matter how tolerant one is, it is impossible 
to join in the chorus of those who believe that girls 
should be brought up like boys. One can do it for 
a while hut certain unavoidable differences make 
134 


 


tliemselves quickly apparent. Men have different 
roles to play in life determined by tlieir difference 
in physical structure. This plays a part in the 
choice of a profession and girls who are not satis- 
fied with their feminine role sometimes find great 
difficulty in adjusting themselves to the occupa- 
tions open to them. When we come to the question 
of preparation for marriage, it is clear that the 
education for the role of a woman must be different 
from that for the part of a man. Girls who are 
dissatisfied with their sex will object to marriage 
as a personal degradation or if they do marry 
they will try to rule. Boys who have been brought 
up. like girls will also experience great difficulty in 
adjusting themselves to our present form of civili- 
zation. 

We must not forget in considering all this that a 
child’s style of life is usually determined by the 
time he is four or five years old. Those are the 
years during which he must develop social feeling 
and the flexibility necq^sary for adjustment. By 
the time a child is five years old his attitude to his 
environment is usually so fixed and mechanized 
that it proceeds in more or less the same direction 
for the rest of his life. His apperception of the 
135 


) 



 
outer world remains the same; the child is caught 
in the trap of his perspectives and repeats unceas- 
ingly his original mental mechanisms and the re- 
suiting actions. Social feeling is limited by the 
boundaries of the individuaFs mental horizon. 