
The Education 
of Children 

By Alfred Adler

Translated by 

Ekamre and Friedrich Jensen, M.D. 



London 

George Allen Unwin Limited 
Museum Street 




FIRST PUBLISHED 193O 


CHEAP EDITION 1935 
REPRINTED 1947 AND 1957 

This book is copyright under the Berne Convention. 
Apart from any fair dealing for the purposes of private 
study, research, criticism or review, as permitted under the 
Copyright Act 191 1, no portion may be reproduced by any 
process without written permission. Enquiry should be 
made to the publishers. 

© George Allen and Unwin Ltd., 1930 


I Introduction 3 

II The Unity of Personality 23 

III The Striving for Superiority and Its Educational 

Significance 36 

IV Directing the Superiority Striving 61 

V The Inferiority Complex 77 

VI The Development of the Child: Preventing the 

Inferiority Complex 95 

VII Social Feeling and the Obstacles to Its Develop- 
ment 116 

VIII The Child’s Position in the Family: The Psychol- 

ogy of the Situation and the Remedy 187 

IX The New Situation as a Test of Preparation 149 

X The Child at School 166 

XI Influences from Outside 190 

XII Adolescence and Sex Education 209 

XIII Pedagogical Mistakes 227 

XIV Educating the Parent 289 

Appendix 

1: An Individual Psychological Questionnaire 251 

II : Five Case Histories with Commentaries 269 




 



CHAPTER ONE 


INTRODUCTION 

From a psychological point of view, the prob- 
lem of education reduces itself, in the case of 
adults, to the problem of self-knowledge and ra- 
tional self-direction. In the case of children educa- 
tion may be approached in the same manner, but 
there is this difference: on account of the immaturity 
of children, the question of guidance — ^never wholly 
absent in the case of adults — stakes on supreme im- 
portance. We could, if we wished, allow children to 
develop of their own accord, and if they had twenty 
thousand years or so to develop and a favorable en- 
vironment, they would eventually approach the 
standards of adult civilization. This method is of 
course out of the question, and the adult must neces- 
sarily take an interest ki guiding the child in his 
development. 

Here the great difficulty is ignorance. It is diffi- 
cult enough for the adult to know himself, to know 
the cause of his emotions, his likes and hates — in 
3 


 
sliortj to understand his own psychology. It is 
doubly difficult to understand children and to guide 
them on the basis of proper knowledge. 

Individual Psychology has specially concerned 
itself with the psychology of children, both on its 
own account and for the light it sheds on adult traits 
and adult behavior. And unlike other psychological 
approaches, it allow^s no gap to exist between theory 
and practice. It fastens on the unity of personality 
and studies its dynamic struggle for development 
and expression. From such a point of view scien- 
tific knowledge is already practical wisdom, for the 
knowledge is a knowledge of mistakes, and whoever 
has this knowledge — ^whether it be the psychologist, 
the parent, the friend or the individual himself — 
immediately sees its practical application in the 
guidance of' the personality concerned. 

On account of the method of approach of In- 
dividual Psychology, its doctrines hang together as 
an organic whole. Because it sees the behavior of in- 
dividuals as motivated and directed by the unity of 
personality, whatever Individual Psychology has to 
say about human behavior reflects the same inter- 
relation that is manifested in the activities of the 
psyche. In this opening chapter the attempt will 
therefore be made to present the viewpoint of In- 
4 


 
dividual Psychology as a whole, with the later chap- 
ters undertaking to treat at fuller length the various 
interrelated problems that are here broached. 

The fundamental fact in human development is 
the dynamic and purposive striving of the psyche. A 
child, from its earliest infancy, is engaged in a con- 
stant struggle to develop, and this struggle is in 
accordance with an unconsciously formed but ever- 
present goal — a vision of greatness, perfection and 
superiority. This struggle, this goal-forming ac- 
tivity, reflects, of course, the peculiarly human 
faculty of thinking and of imagining, and it dom- 
inates all our specific acts throughout life. It dom- 
inates even our thoughts, for we do not think ob- 
jectively but in accordance with the goal and style 
of life we have formed. 

The unity of personality is implicit in each human 
being’s existence. Every individual represents both 
a unity of personality and the individual fashioning 
of that unity. The individual is thus both the picture 
and the artist. He is the aKist of his own personality, 
but as an artist he is neither an infallible worker, 
nor a person with a complete understanding of soul 
and body — he is rather a weak, extremely fallible 
and imperfect human being. 

5 


 

In considering the construction of a personality
the chief defect to be noted is that its unitys its par- 
ticular style and goal, is not built upon objective 
reality, but upon the subjective view the individual 
takes of the facts of life. A conception, a view of a 
fact, is never the fact itself, and it is for this reason 
that human beings, ail of whom live in the same 
world of facts, mould themselves differently. Each 
one organizes himself according to his personal view 
of things, and some views are more sound, and some 
views are less sound. We must always reckon with 
these individual mistakes and failures in the develop- 
ment of a human being. Especially must we reckon 
with the misinterpretations made in early childhood, 
for these dominate the subsequent course of our ex- 
istence. 

A concrete instance of this may he seen in this 
clinical case. A woman, at the age of fifty-two, was 
always disparaging women that were older than 
herself. She related the fact that when she was a 
tiny child, she always felt humiliated and under- 
valued because of an older sister, who received all 
the attention. Looking at this case wth what we 
might call the “vertical” point of view of Individual 
Psychology, we can see the same mechanism, the 
same psychological dynamics both at the beginning 
6 


 
of Iier life and at present — ^that is to say, near the 
elose of her existence. There is always the fear of 
being undervalued and the anger and irritation at 
finding others favored or preferred. Even if we knew 
nothing else of this woman’s life, or of her particular 
unity of personality, we could almost fill in the gaps 
in our knowledge on the basis of the two facts given. 
The psychologist acts here like a novelist, who has 
to construct a human being with a definite line of ac- 
tion, style of life, or pattern of behavior, and has to 
construct him in such a way that the impression of a 
unified personality is not disturbed. A good psy- 
chologist would be able to predict the conduct of this 
woman in certain situations, and to describe clearly 
the traits which accompany this particular “life line” 
in her personality. 

The striving or goal-forming activity, which is 
responsible for the construction of individual per- 
sonalities, presupposes another important psy- 
chological fact. This is the sense or feeling of in- 
feriority. All children have an inlierent feeling of 
inferiority which stimulates the imagination and in- 
cites attempts to dissipate the psychological sense of 
inferiority by bettering the situation. A bettering of 
one’s situation results in a lessening of the feeling of 
7 


 
inferiority. From a psychological point of view it 
may be regarded as a compensation. 

Now tile important thing about the sense of in- 
feriority and the mechanism of psychological com- 
pensation is that it opens up a vast possibility of 
making mistakes. The sense of inferiority may stim- 
ulate objective accomplishment ; it may also result 
in a purely psychological adjustment which widens 
the gulf between the individual and objective reality. 
Or, again, the sense of inferiority may appear so 
tragic that the only way it can be overcome is by the 
development of psychological compensatory traits, 
which in the end may not overcome the situation at 
ail but which are nonetheless psychologically neces- 
sary and inevitable. 

There are, for example, three classes of children 
who manifest very clearly the development of com- 
pensatory traits. They are children who come into 
the world with weak or imperfect organs; children 
who are treated with severity and with no affection ; 
and, finally, children who receive too much pamper- 
ing. 

We may take these three classes of children as ex- 
emplifying three basic situations in terms of which 
the development of the more normal types of chil- 
dren may be studied and understood. Not every 
8 


 
child is born a cripple, but it is surprising how many 
children manifest, to a greater or lesser degree, 
psychological traits based on some physical difficulty 
or weak organ — psychological traits of which the 
archetype may be studied in the extreme case of the 
crippled child. And as for the classifications of pam- 
pered and hated children, practically all children fall 
to a greater or lesser degree psychological traits 
based on some physical difficulty or weak organ — 
psychological traits of which the archetype may be 
studied in the extreme case of the crippled child. 
And as for the classifications of pampered and hated 
children, practically all children fall to a greater or 
lesser degree into one, or even both groupings. 

All these three primary situations produce a feel- 
ing of insufficiency and inferiority, and by way of 
reaction, an ambition beyond the realm of human 
possibility. The sense of inferiority and the striving 
for superiority are always two phases of the same 
fundamental fact in human life, and are thus in- 
separable. In pathological situations, it is difficult to 
say whether it is the exaggerated feeling of inferior- 
ity, or the exacerbated striving for superiority which 
is most harmful. They both go together in more or 
less rhythmical waves. In the case of children we 
find the inordinate ambition, aroused by an exag- 
9 


 
gerated sense of inferiority, acting like a poison in 
the soul — forever making the child dissatisfied. Such 
a dissatisfaction is not one which leads to useful ac- 
tivity. It remains fruitless because it is fed by a dis- 
proportionate ambition. This ambition may be seen 
twisting itself into character traits and personal 
mannerisms. It acts like a perpetual irritant mak- 
ing the individual supersensitive and on guard lest 
he be hurt or trodden upon. 

Types of this nature — and the annals of In- 
dividual Psychology are full of them — develop into 
persons whose abilities remain dormant, persons who 
become, as we say, “nervous,” or eccentric. Persons 
of these types, when driven too far, wind up in the 
world of the irresponsible and the criminal because 
they think only of themselves and not of others. 
Their egotism, both moral and psychological, be- 
comes absolute. We find some of them avoiding 
reality and objective facts and constructing a new 
world for themselves. By day-dreaming, by bugging 
imaginative fantasies as if they represented reality, 
they finally succeed in creating psychological peace. 
They ha^T reconciled reality and the mind by con- 
structing reality in the image of the mind. 

In all such developments tlie tell-tale criterion 
which needs to be watched by the psychologist and 
10 


 
by the parent is the degree of social feeling which 
the child or individual manifests. Social feeling is the 
crucial and deciding factor in normal development. 
Every disturbance which results in a lessening of the 
social or communal feeling has a tremendously harm- 
ful effect on the mental growth of the child. Social 
feeling is the barometer of the child’s normality. 

It is around the principle of social feeling that 
Individual Psychology has developed its pedagogi- 
cal technique. Parents or guardians must not per- 
mit a child to attach himself to one person only. If 
this is permitted the child wdll find himself badly or 
insufficiently prepared for later life. 

A good way of finding out the degree of social 
feeling of a child is to observe him at the time when 
he enters school. On entering school the child meets 
with one of liis earliest and severest tests. The school 
is a new situation for the child: it will therefore re- 
veal how Well the child has been prepared to face 
new situations, and particularly how w^ell he has 
been prepared to meet new persons. 

It is the general lack of knowledge as to how to 
prepare a child for school that explains why so many 
adults look back on their school years as a sort of 
nightmare. Of course the school, when properly ad- 
ministered, will often make up for the deficiencies 
11 


 
in the earlier rearing of the children. The ideal school 
should serve as a mediator between the home and 
the wide world of reality, and should be a place not 
merely for book knowledge, but a place in which 
the knowledge and art of living should be taught. 
But while we are waiting for the ideal school to de- 
velop so that it may overcome the deficiencies in 
the parental education of children, we can also put 
our finger on the faults of the parents. 

For analyzing the faults of family upbringing the 
school may serve as an indicator, precisely because 
it is not yet an ideal environment. Children who have 
not been taught how to make contact with others feel 
themselves alone when they enter school. As a result 
they are regarded as peculiar, and thus the initial 
tendency grows stronger and stronger with time. 
Their proper development is thwarted, and they be- 
come behavior problem children. People blame the 
school in such cases, although the school has here 
merely brought out the latent defects in the home 
education. 

It has always been an open question to Individual 
Psychology whether behavior problem children can 
make any progress in school at all. We have always 
been able to prove that it is a danger sign when a 
child begins to fail at school. It is a sign not so much 
12 



THE EDUCATION OP CHILDREN 
of failure in studies but of psycbological failure. It 
means that the child has begun to lose faith in him- 
self. Discouragement has made its appearance, and 
the cliild begins to avoid useful roads and normal 
tasks, searching all the time for another outlet, a road 
to freedom and easy success. Instead of the road 
which society has mapped out, he chooses a private 
road where he can erect a compensation for his in- 
feriority by attaining a sense of superiority. He 
chooses the path that is always attractive to dis- 
couraged individuals — the path of quickest psy- 
chological success. It is easier to distinguish one’s 
self and to give one’s self the feeling of a conqueror 
by throwing off social and moral responsibilities and 
by breaking the law, than by following the estab- 
lished social paths. But this easy road to superiority 
is always an indication of underlying cowardice and 
weakness, no matter what apparent daring and brav- 
ery are manifested in the outward acts. Such a per- 
son always tries to do those things in which he is 
certain to succeed, thus showing off his superiority. 

Just as we observe that criminals, despite their ap- 
parent recklessness and bravery, are at bottom cow- 
ardly, so we have been able to see how children in less 
dangerous situations betray their sense of weakness 
by various small signs. Thus we commonly see chil- 
is 


 


dren (and for that matter adults, too) who are not 
able to stand upright but must always lean against 
something. Under the old methods of training chil- 
dren and the old ways of understanding such signs, 
the symptom was treated but not the underlying 
situation. One used to say to such a child, “Don’t 
lean on something all the time.” Actually what mat™ 
ters here is not that the child leans, hut that he al- 
ways feels the need of a support. One can readily 
persuade the child, either by punishment or reward, 
to give up this sign of weakness, hut his great need 
for support is not thereby relieved. The disease con- 
tinues. It is a good educator who can read signs and 
can eradicate the underlying disease with sympathy 
and understanding. 

From a single sign one can often draw conclu- 
sions as to the presence of many qualities or traits. 
In the case of a child obsessed with the need of lean- 
ing on something, we can see at once that such traits 
as anxiety and dependence are sure to be present. By 
comparing him with similar persons whose cases we 
know thoroughly, we can reconstruct such a person- 
ality, and we can see, in short, that we have to deal 
with a pampered child. 

We turn now to the character traits of another 
class of children — ^those who have gone without love. 

U 


THE EDUCATION OE CHILDREN 
Tlie traits of this class, in their most developed form, 
can be observed by stndying the biographies of all 
the great enemies of humanity. In all the life stories 
of these men the one thing that stands out is the fact 
that as children tliej?' were badly treated. In this way 
they developed a hardness of character, envy and 
hatred. They could not bear to see others happy. 
Now, envious persons of this type are found not 
merely among straight villains but among sup- 
posedly normal persons. Such individuals when they 
have charge of children think that the children 
should not be any happier than they themselves 
were as children. We find such a view applied by 
parents to their children, as well as by guardians 
to the children of others who are put in their 
charge. 

Such a view, such thoughts, do not spring from 
had intentions. They simply reflect the mentality of 
those who have been harshly brought up. Such per- 
sons can produce any number of good reasons and 
maxims, as for example, “Spare the rod and spoil 
the child!” And they give us endless proofs and ex- 
amples, which do not quite convince us inasmuch as 
the futility of a rigid, authoritative education is 
proved by the simple fact that it estranges the child 
from his educator. 


15 


 

By exploring various symptoms and interrelating 
them^ the psychologist can, after some practice, or- 
ganize a system by the aid of which the hidden psy- 
chological processes of an individual may be re- 
vealed, While every point which we examine by this 
system reflects something of the complete personal- 
ity of the individual under investigation, we can 
feel satisfied only when we get the same indications 
at every point of our examination. Individual Psy- 
chology is thus an art as well as a science, and it can- 
not be too much emphasized that the speculative 
scheme, the system of concepts, is not to be applied 
in a wooden and mechanical fashion to an individual 
under examination. In all investigations the pri- 
mary thing is to study the individual; we must never 
draw far-reaching conclusions from one or two 
modes of expression, but we must look for all pos- 
sible supporting phases. Only when we are success- 
ful in confirming our tentative hypothesis, only 
when we have been able, for example, to find the 
same stubbornness and discouragement in other as- 
pects of his behavior, can we say with certainty that 
this stubbornness or discouragement permeates the 
entire personality. 

In this connection it must be remembered that the 
subject under examination has no understanding of 
16 


 
kis own forms of expression and is thus unable to 
conceal Ms true self. We see his personality in action, 
and his personality is revealed not by what he says or 
thinks about himself hut by his acts interpreted in 
their context. It is not that the patient deliberately 
wants to lie to us, but we have learned to recognize 
a vast gulf between a man’s conscious thoughts and 
his unconscious motivations — a gulf which can best 
be bridged by a disinterested but sympathetic out- 
sider, The outsider — ^whether he be the psychologist, 
or the parent or the teacher — should learn to inter- 
pret a personality on the basis of objective facts seen 
as the expression of the purposive, but more or less 
unconscious, strivings of the individual. 

Thus the attitude of the individual with regard 
to the three fundamental questions of individual and 
social life reveals his true self as nothing else can. 
The first of these questions is the social relation, 
which we have already discussed in the context of 
the contrast between the private and objective views 
of reality. But the soci&l relation manifests itself 
also as a specific task — ^it is the task of making 
friends and getting along with people. How does the 
individual meet that problem? What is his answer? 
When a human being believes he can evade the ques- 
17 


 
lion by saying that the matter of friends, the matter 
of social relationships is of complete indiifereiice to 
him, then indifference is his answer. From this in- 
difference we can, of course, draw conclusions as to 
the direction and organisation, of his personality. It 
is to be noted, moreover, that the social relation is 
not confined merely to the physical making of 
friends and meeting of people: all the abstract 
qualities like friendship, comradeship, truthfulness 
and loyalty cluster about this relation, and the an- 
swer to the social relation indicates the Individ oaFs 
answer on all these points. 

The second great question concerns how the in- 
dividual wants to make use of his life — what part he 
wants to take in the general division of labor. If the 
social question may he said to be determined by the 
existence of more than one ego, by the relationship 
I-you, then we may say that this question is deter- 
mined by the fundamental relationship Man-Earth. 
If one could reduce all mankind into one person, this 
person would have mutuality with the earth. What 
does he want from the earth? Just as in the case of 
the first question, the solution of the problem of oc- 
cupation is not a one-sided or private matter, but a 
matter between man and earth. It is a two-sided re- 
lationship in which man hasn’t got it all his own way. 

1 $ 


 
Success is determined not by our private will but in 
relation to objective realities. For this reason the 
answer that an individual makes, and the manner in 
which lie makes it, to the question of occupation 
throws a very revealing light on his personality and 
on his attitude towards life. 

The third fundamental question arises from the 
fact that mankind is divided into two sexes. The 
solution of this problem is again not a private, sub- 
jective matter, but must be solved according to the 
inherent objective logic of the relationship. What is 
my position towards the other sex? The typical pri- 
vate conception is again a mistaken conception. A 
correct solution can be arrived at only through a care- 
ful consideration of all the questions which cluster 
around the sex relationship. And it stands to reason 
that every departure from a correct solution of the 
problem of love and marriage indicates a mistake, 
an error in the personality. Also many of the harm- 
ful consequences that follow a wrong solution of this 
problem are to be interpreted in the light of the un- 
derlying error of personality. 

We can see, therefore, that we are in a position to 
discover the general style of life and particular goal 
of an individual from the way in which he answers 
19 


THE EDUCATION OE CHILDREN 
these tliree questions. The goal is omnipotent. It 
decides a person’s style of life and it will be reflected 
in every one of his acts. Thus if the goal is a striving 
towards being a fellow man, a goal directed to the 
useful side of life, the stamp of that goal will be ap- 
parent in the individual’s solutions of all his prob- 
lems. All the solutions will reflect constructive use- 
fulness, and the individual will have the sense of 
happiness and the feeling of worth and power that 
go with constructive and useful activity. If the goal 
is directed otherwise, if it is directed to the private 
and useless side of life, the individual will find him" 
self unable to solve fundamental problems, and he 
will also lack the joy that comes from their proper 
solution. 

There is a strong interconnection between all 
these fundamental problems, and it is made all the 
stronger by the fact that in the course of social life 
specific tasks spring out of these fundamental prob- 
lems which can be carried out properly only in a 
social or communal setting, or, in other words, on 
the basis of social feeling. These tasks begin in the 
earliest years of childhood, when our sense-organs 
are developing in accordance with the stimulus of 
social life, in looking, speaking, hearing — in our re- 
lations to our brothers, sisters, parents, relatives, 
20 


 
acquaintances, comrades, friends and teachers. They 
continue through life in the same manner, so that he 
who gets out of social touch with his fellows is lost. 

And so Individual Psychology stands on firm 
ground when it regards as “right” that which is use- 
ful for the community. It realizes that every de- 
parture from the social standard is an offense against 
right and brings with it a conflict with the objective 
laws and objective necessities of reality. This clash 
with objectivity makes itself felt first of all in the 
feeling of worthlessness on the part of the offending 
individual, and it also comes out — ^with even stronger 
force — in the retaliations of the others who feel 
themselves aggrieved. Finally, it may be said, that 
the departure from the social standard violates an 
immanent social ideal which every one of us, con- 
sciously or unconsciously, carries in himself. 

With its rigorous emphasis on social-mindedness 
as a test of development. Individual Psychology 
finds it easy to understand and evaluate the style of 
life of any child. F or as soon as the child is confronted 
with a life problem, he will reveal, as if he were under 
examination, whether or not he has been “rightly” 
prepared. He will show, in other words, whether he 
has social feeling, whether he has courage, under- 
21 


 
standing, and in general a useful goal. What we tliei 
try to find out is the form and rliytlim of his upwarc 
striving, the degree of his feeling of inferiority, the 
intensity of his social consciousness. All these tliingj 
are closely interconnected and interpenetrate one 
another so as to form an organic and imbreakabh 
unity — a unity that is unbreakable until the fault oj 
construction is discovered and a reconstruction is ac' 
complished. 
